1

Semantic Communications Based on Adaptive
Generative Models and Information Bottleneck

arXiv:2309.02387v1 [eess.SP] 5 Sep 2023

Sergio Barbarossa, Fellow, IEEE, Danilo Comminiello, Senior, IEEE, Eleonora Grassucci, Graduate, IEEE
Francesco Pezone, Student, IEEE, Stefania Sardellitti, Member, IEEE, Paolo Di Lorenzo, Senior, IEEE

Abstract—Semantic communications represent a significant
breakthrough with respect to the current communication
paradigm, as they focus on recovering the meaning behind
the transmitted sequence of symbols, rather than the symbols
themselves. In semantic communications, the scope of the destination is not to recover a list of symbols symbolically identical
to the transmitted ones, but rather to recover a message that is
semantically equivalent to the semantic message emitted by the
source. This paradigm shift introduces many degrees of freedom
to the encoding and decoding rules that can be exploited to make
the design of communication systems much more efficient. In
this paper, we present an approach to semantic communication
building on three fundamental ideas: 1) represent data over
a topological space as a formal way to capture semantics, as
expressed through relations; 2) use the information bottleneck
principle as a way to identify relevant information and adapt
the information bottleneck online, as a function of the wireless
channel state, in order to strike an optimal trade-off between
transmit power, reconstruction accuracy and delay; 3) exploit
probabilistic generative models as a general tool to adapt the
transmission rate to the wireless channel state and make possible
the regeneration of the transmitted images or run classification
tasks at the receiver side.
Index Terms—Semantic communications, information bottleneck, deep generative models.

I. I NTRODUCTION

N

OTHWISTANDING the enormous potentials of 5G networks and their expected evolution, significant efforts
are already being devoted to designing a future generation of
networks, namely Sixth Generation (6G), which is expected
to create a cyber-physical continuum between the connected
physical world of senses, actions, and experiences and its programmable digital representation. Next-generation networks
will need to provide intelligence, limitless connectivity, and
full synchronization of the physical and digital worlds. One of
the distinguishing features of 6G networks will be the synergy
between Artificial Intelligence (AI) and networking: On the
one hand, the new networks will need AI to become more
autonomous and possibly zero-touch; on the other hand, the
new networks will bring AI services as close as possible to
Pezone is with Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. Barbarossa, Comminiello,
Grassucci, Sardellitti, and Di Lorenzo are with the Dept. of Information Engineering, Electronics, and Telecommunications, Sapienza University of Rome,
Italy. Email: {sergio.barbarossa, danilo.comminiello, eleonora.grassucci, stefania.sardellitti, paolo.dilorenzo}@uniroma1.it. This work was partially supported by the European Union under the Italian National Recovery and
Resilience Plan (NRRP) of NextGenerationEU, partnership on “Telecommunications of the Future” (PE00000001 - program RESTART; the PRIN
2017 Project Liquid Edge; the EU-Taiwan project 5G-CONNI, under Grant
861459; and by Huawei Technology France SASU, under agreement N.
TC20220919044.

the end users, to satisfy service delay constraints or minimize
energy consumption [1]. The new networks will need to be
AI-native, meaning that AI tools will constitute the building
blocks of the network itself, rather than just applications
running on top of the network.
One of the main motivations underlying the need for a new
generation of communication networks is sustainability: The
current exponential growth of data traffic is not sustainable
in the long run. To promote sustainability, it is necessary to
envisage new communication paradigms able to support new
services, but without necessarily increasing the data rates. A
possible way out comes from a better understanding of human
intelligence and social interaction mechanisms.
A distinguishing feature of humans with respect to other
animals is their apparatus of sophisticated social interaction
skills. To communicate with each other and share meaningful
experiences, humans create symbols to represent their perceptual experiences. Natural language is the paramount example
of human interaction based on the association of sounds to
objects of the real world, as well as to abstractions of the real
world created by the human brain. Building on the composition
of basic sounds, humans form structures, from phonemes to
words to sentences, etc., that enable a very complex interaction. A key point to highlight in this association is the trade-off
between the complexity of the representation and the relevance
of the used symbols to convey the intended meaning, within
a certain approximation or distortion. The other fundamental
interaction mechanism involves vision. Also in this case, the
scene that our brain builds from the signals coming from the
optical nerve is a representation of the outside world that
is simple enough to convey the relevant information, while
discarding a lot of information as irrelevant with respect to
the context.
Both examples show that the association between mental
states and symbols (either sounds or visual signs) used to
represent them satisfies a fundamental parsimony principle:
The association must be simple enough to require small
effort and time, while at the same time keeping the relevant
information about the intended meaning or the goal of communication. We believe that next-generation networks should take
inspiration from these principles, by focusing on the extraction
of the relevant information and the retrieval of the semantics
associated with the transmitted symbols. In this paper, we
propose an approach to semantic communication over wireless
channels based on three important pillars:
• topology-based knowledge representation,
• information bottleneck principle,

2

probabilistic generative models.
The first pillar is based on the idea that semantics may
be formally represented through the set of relations between
the basic elements of a language, to be intended in a very
general way. The formal way to represent relations is to define
the associated topological space. Graphs are an important
example of a topological space, widely used for example in
Natural Language Processing (NLP). However, in general,
graphs are unable to capture all the information and it is
necessary to resort to higher-order structures, like simplicial
or cell complexes, which we assume as the basis for our
knowledge representation.
Secondly, we start from the assumption that a communication typically occurs to fulfill a shared goal between source
and destination. Then, as the second pillar of our approach,
we introduce a variation of the information bottleneck (IB)
principle to identify the information relevant to the intended
goal of communication and we derive the trade-off between
complexity and accuracy of the representation. The IB principle is used to guide the design of the source encoder to the
goal of communication, which is not necessarily the recovery
of the transmitted bits but rather the fulfillment of a goal.
Furthermore, we propose an online mechanism to adapt the
bottleneck to cope with the wireless channel variability in
order to induce some desired behavior, like minimization of
average energy consumption or average delay necessary to
reach a decision on the transmitted data.
However, finding the source encoder from the information
bottleneck principle in a general scenario is a rather complex
task. For this reason, we propose, as the third pillar, a
numerically efficient coding method based on probabilistic
deep generative models. These models are used to represent
the relevant parameters to be used at the receiver to regenerate
a message that is semantically equivalent to the transmitted
message, using only a reduced subset of symbols. Then, using
the IB idea, we adapt the amount of symbols to be transmitted
to the channel conditions and to the accuracy in the fulfillment
of the communication goal.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews the state of the art. Section III illustrates a general
scheme of semantic communication. In Section IV, we formulate a formal way to represent semantics through topological
spaces, like graphs, simplicial or cell complexes, and show
how different spaces can lead to different trade-offs between
representation complexity and accuracy. In Section V, we
propose a principled way to design a wireless communication
system based on a generalization of the Information Bottleneck principle. Then, in Section VI, we illustrate a practical
application of the IB approach exploiting generative models
based on variational autoencoders.
•

II. S TATE OF THE ART
Current communication systems are still based on Shannon
paradigm, which is firmly rooted in probability theory. As
already suggested by Shannon’s collaborator, Warren Weaver,
communication takes place on three levels [2]:
1) “transmission of symbols (the technical problem)”;

2) “semantic exchange of transmitted symbols (the semantic problem)”;
3) “effect of semantic information exchange (the effectiveness problem)”.
Shannon deliberately focused on the technical problem only
and derived the fundamental limits for the reliable recovery of
the sequence of symbols transmitted by the source after propagation through a noisy channel. Shannon provided also the
fundamental rate-distortion tradeoffs, relating the complexity
of the representation and the distortion of the reconstruction.
Shannon’s theory has nothing to do with the meaning that
the symbols represent, but only with the frequency of the
symbols occurrence. Pressing keys of a computer keyboard
at random produces a sequence of symbols that has maximum
entropy, i.e., the maximum amount of average information, in
the Shannon sense, but it has almost zero semantic information
because there is essentially no meaning associated with it.
More recently, a Shannon-like rate–distortion theory has been
indicated as a principled mathematical framework for understanding human perception and visual perceptual memory
[3]. But clearly, the formulation of a semantic information
theory, based on firm principles, is still an open problem. A
first step in the search for meaning beyond symbols entails
incorporating the logic of the language used to communicate.
A first attempt to move in this direction was developed by
Carnap and Bar-Hillel in [4]. Since then, several schools
of thought have proposed different alternative approaches
to generalize Shannon’s information theory, each aimed at
emphasizing different perspectives: philosophy of information,
logic and information, information algebra, information flow,
and algorithmic information theory.
Recently, semantic communication has been identified as
a possible breakthrough of 6G networks in [5]. Joint sourcechannel encoders exploiting the structure of images or natural
language have been proposed in [6]–[8]. In applications such
as text transmission, the semantics underlying the text has also
been explicitly exploited in designing a joint source/channel
coding (JSCC) technique [8]. The authors of [9] designed
speech recognition-oriented semantic communications to directly recognize the speech signals in texts. More recently,
a transformer-based approach has also been investigated in
[10] to support both image and text transmission. Alternative
methods were also proposed in [11] to define an optimized
common-language between a listener and a speaker, employing reinforcement learning and curriculum learning. Very
recently, a semantic framework for video conferencing has
been proposed, by exploiting semantically relevant keypoints
representing the facial expressions [12].
III. S EMANTIC COMMUNICATION ARCHITECTURES
A possible semantic communication system is sketched in
Fig. 1, where the semantic level is represented on top of
the symbolic level. In this block diagram, it is important
to distinguish the semantic message w from its symbolic
representation x, which we denote as the symbolic message.
The distinguishing feature of semantic communication, as
opposed to conventional (i.e., symbolic) communication, is

Semantic level

3

Knowledge
sharing

KBS

Source

KBD

Destination

w’
Semantic
message
generator

Semantic
message
interpreter
semantic feedback

Symbolic level

w
Source/
channel
encoder

symbolic feedback

x

Physical
channel

x’
Source/
channel
decoder

y

Fig. 1. Block diagram of a semantic communication system.

that, whichever is the set of symbols used by the source to
represent and communicate a semantic message, the scope
of the receiver is not to recover the sequence of transmitted
symbols, but only to recreate a message that is semantically
equivalent to the transmitted one. This means that there is no
(semantic) error even if the symbolic message x′ regenerated
at the receiver side is completely different from x, as far
as the corresponding symbolic message w′ is semantically
equivalent to w. This property is what makes semantic communication potentially much more efficient than conventional
communication because it adds many degrees of freedom in
the reconstruction process. This advantage is paid in terms of
the complexity needed to represent semantics.
As depicted in Fig. 1, the mapping from a semantic message
to its symbolic representation occurs via a knowledge base
(KB) system, which incorporates the rules underlying the
language used to communicate 1 . A language, in very general
terms, is composed of a set of elements (objects) and a grammar, i.e. a set of rules used to combine the elements in order to
create messages that have a meaning in the given language. A
KB system is typically composed of a computational ontology,
facts, rules, and constraints [13]. As we will see in Section VI,
a possible implementation of a knowledge base system may
be given by a variational autoencoder (VAE).
An important feature of the scheme of Fig. 1 is the presence
of a feedback from the destination to the source. Feedback
can occur within levels (i.e. technical or semantic level), or
1 Ideally, source and destination should possess the same KB. In practice,
the two KB systems can be different, as in Fig. 1, but a knowledge-sharing
mechanism needs to be implemented to adapt the destination KB to the source
KB.

across levels, i.e. from the semantic to the technical level.
This feedback is important because it makes possible to adapt
the transmission rate as a function of how well the destination
is able to take correct decisions about the semantics conveyed
by the symbols or to fulfill the goal of communication. In
Section V, we will show how to implement this feedback by
adapting the IB to the channel variability and to the accuracy
of the decision at the destination side.
IV. K NOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION OVER TOPOLOGICAL
SPACES

A shared definition of semantics is still missing. Nevertheless, we may think of representing semantics through the set of
relations between the elements of a language. The formal way
to represent relations is by introducing the corresponding topological space, i.e. a space composed of a set of elements along
with a set of relations among them. The simplest example of a
topological space is a graph, representing pairwise or dyadic
relations (edges) between pairs of objects (vertices). Graphbased knowledge representation mechanisms have been largely
investigated for example, in Natural Language Processing
(NLP), where graphs play a key role in associating a meaning
to a sentence and in solving disambiguation problems. In
computer vision, semantic relationships are typically expressed
as graphs grouping portions of the image representative of the
same object class, or to recognize the shape of 3D objects.
However, graphs are limited as they are only able to encode
pairwise relations. In many applications, the semantic relations
may not be restricted to pairwise relations, but should incorporate higher-order (multiway) relations. Examples of higherorder graphs, still endowed with a rich algebraic structure,

4

0.8
0.7
Simplicial triangulation

0.6

Cell complex

NSE

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

Sparsity

Fig. 2. Accuracy vs. representation complexity.

are simplicial or cell complexes. In most applications, the
data to be transmitted are defined over a topological space.
The idea we wish to highlight is that the identification of the
space, through the relations among its constitutive elements,
has a deep impact on our capability to find a data representation that yields a good trade-off between accuracy and
complexity. To investigate how higher-order topological spaces
can successfully encode the semantic relationships among the
observed data, we consider as a numerical example an image
segmentation task. The goal is to find a semantic segmentation
of the image based on cell complexes by associating each
segment to a polygonal cell over which the same semantic
information is observed. We considered a gray-scale version
of Mona Lisa portrait of Leonardo da Vinci, represented using
12 gray levels. As a first example of space, we build a
gradient-based Delaunay triangulation of the image using 6100
triangles. The signal associated with this space is the image
intensity over each triangle. Then, as a second example of
space, we glued all triangles having similar image intensity,
thus forming a cell (polygonal) complex. In the example, the
resulting cell complex is composed of 969 cells. Then, to
compare the representations over different spaces, we built
a dictionary using the eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrices
associated with each space and computed the optimal tradeoff between the accuracy of the signal representation over
each dictionary and the corresponding complexity (number of
dictionary elements used to represent the image). In Fig. 2,
we plot the accuracy (normalized squared error (NSE)) vs.
complexity. From Fig. 2, it is evident the considerable gain in
terms of accuracy/complexity trade-off achievable using a cell
complex instead of a simplicial complex.
V. S OURCE ENCODING BASED ON THE I NFORMATION
B OTTLENECK P RINCIPLE
In this section, we dig further into knowledge representation
and put it in the context of goal-oriented communication
over a wireless channel. An example can be an IoT device
that sends images to a server that runs an image recognition
application. Denoting by X the transmitted vector (image)
and by Y the corresponding decision (label) to be taken at
the receiver side, our first task is to identify the information

strictly relevant to the fulfillment of the (decision) goal. Our
second task is to derive the structure of the source encoder
that extracts this relevant information while achieving the best
trade-off between complexity of the representation (number of
bits used to represent the relevant information) and accuracy
on the decision variable Y . To approach this problem formally, we introduce a variation of the Information Bottleneck
(IB) principle [14] as a basic principle to design the source
encoder in order to minimize the complexity (number of
bits) of the representation, while preserving only the relevant
information about Y . More specifically, denoting by T the
compressed variables, the conventional IB method finds the
probabilistic compression rule, given by the conditional probability pT /X (t/x), that minimizes a linear combination, with
nonnegative coefficients, of the mutual information I(X; T )
between the input X and the encoded variable T and the
mutual information I(T ; Y ) between and the encoded variable
T and the decision variable Y . In this formulation, I(X; T )
represents the complexity of the encoding rule (measured in
number of bits), while I(T ; Y ) represents the relevance of the
encoded variable T for the retrieval of Y . In this paper, we
modify the IB principle to make it suitable for transmission
over wireless communications. First of all, we consider the
real case where the transmitted data are corrupted by noise,
so that the receiver does not have direct access to T , but only
to a version T + η corrupted by the channel noise η. Second,
we redefine the bottleneck optimization problem as
min I(X; T ) + β · M SE(Y, Ŷ ),

A,M

(1)

where T = A · X + ξ denotes a linear encoder, including
additive noise ξ, while Ŷ = M · (T + η) is a linear estimate
of Y ; β is a scalar parameter that allows us to tune the
trade-off between complexity and relevant information: small
values of β lead to small complexity encoders, but possibly
large distortion, whereas large values of β yield a small
distortion, but with greater complexity. Even though the
new optimization problem in (1) is nonconvex, we managed
to find a closed-form solution for the case where all the
involved variables are Gaussian. The linear structure of
the encoder/decoder is optimal in the Gaussian case, but
suboptimal in general. For this reason, in Section VI we will
use a more general structure based on variational autoencoders.
Our idea is to adapt β as a function of the channel state
and of the required classification task accuracy, while also
enforcing a constraint on the decision delay, defined as the
sum of the processing and communication delay. To cope
with the unpredictable wireless channel variability, we adopt
a stochastic optimization framework, able to work without
knowledge of the channel probabilistic model and of the task
arrival rates. In this framework, time is slotted in intervals of
equal duration. In each time slot, the problem is converted into
the optimization of a deterministic problem, for each time slot,
taking into account what has been done in the previous slot
by introducing a set of real and virtual queues that quantify
how well the method is satisfying the optimization constraints.
The optimization variables are the transmit power of all the

5

10

-3

TABLE I
R ESULTS FOR DYNAMIC AND STATIC CHANNEL CONDITIONS UNDER
DIFFERENT PSNR VALUES DURING THE TRANSMISSION .

Delay [s]

Power (device) [W]

0.003
0.005
0.007

10

-4

10 -5

10

-6

0

0.05

0.1

0.15
NMSE

0.2

0.25

0.3

Fig. 3. Trade-off between Power-Delay-Error

devices, the clock rates used at both source and destination
sides to process the data, and the trade-off parameter β used
to adjust the bottleneck. The objective of the optimization is to
minimize the average energy consumption, under constraints
on average accuracy and service delay. A numerical result is
reported in Fig. 3, showing the average power consumption vs.
the Normalized Mean Square Error (NMSE), in a regression
problem, for three different values of the average delay. The
delay is composed of the sum of the transmission delay plus
the time necessary to process the data. As expected, imposing
smaller average delays forces the system to use more power
to achieve the same NMSE value. The above results refer to
a simple regression task and adopt linear encoders because
they represent the optimal choice in the Gaussian case. In
the next section, we generalize the idea to the general case,
implementing the IB principle using a variational autoencoder.
VI. S EMANTIC COMMUNICATION BASED ON
G ENERATIVE M ODELS
Generative models are experiencing an increasing interest
in the AI (and not only) community due to their impressive
results in a plethora of tasks including image super-resolution,
denoising, image-to-audio translation, 3D synthesis. The core
idea of generative modeling is to build a sufficiently complex
and powerful model for learning the data distribution so as
to acquire the ability to draw representative samples from the
learned distribution. When learning the distribution, the model
grasps the semantic information of the samples and it is able
to generate samples with similar semantic information. As an
example, when learning to generate human faces, the neural
model begins generating semantic aspects of them, such as
eyes, nose, and mouth, while progressively building also other
contents such as hair and ears.
In this work, we use generative models as the basic building
block of a semantic communication system. In particular, we
focus on a broad class of generative models called generative
latent variable models (GLVMs) [15], which first transform
the input data into a low-dimensional space, the latent space,
containing the semantic characteristics of such data, and then

Channel condition

PSNR (dB)

Latent dim

Classification Accuracy↑
CIFAR10
MNIST

No channel
Static
Static
Static
Static
Static
Dynamic

100
25
15
12.5
10
Varying

4, Fixed
4, Fixed
4, Fixed
4, Fixed
4, Fixed
3, Varying

92.701
88.262
87.804
87.982
88.238
86.934
86.840

98.880
96.433
97.381
97.648
97.266
96.273
96.305

sample from this space to generate data having semantically
similar features in the data space. GLVMs are composed by
a pair of deep neural networks: i) an encoder, or recognition
model, whose objective is to learn the latent variables that
contain the semantic features of the input, and ii) a deep
neural network called decoder, or generative model, whose
aim is to transform the received latent representation into new
reconstructed samples with preserved semantic characteristics.
In our approach, the two blocks of a GLVM are used as
the encoder and decoder components of our communication
scheme, as depicted in Figure 4.
In our semantic communication scheme the transmitted
symbols are the latent variables, which live in a low-dimension
space, while the receiver uses the received variables to regenerate an image using the generative model. The recognition
and generative models are trained jointly offline, incorporating
a non-trainable channel model in the middle, as to simulate
the presence of channel noise during the training phase.
The scheme of Fig. 4 has enormous potentials in terms of
source compression with respect to conventional schemes, and
thus reduction of the transmit data rate, because it exploits
the shared knowledge between transmitter and receiver. This
information is encoded in the GLVM. The advantage comes
from the fact that the generated image at the destination side
may not coincide in any single pixel with the transmitted
image, and yet it may well represent the transmitted image.
The distinguishing feature of a GLVM used in this way is that
the dimension of the latent space can be adapted over time,
depending on channel conditions, without retraining the two
networks. The scheme of Fig. 4 is an example of the general
scheme of Fig. 1, where the source and destination KB’s are
the recognition and generative models, and the feedback from
destination to source is given by a parameter that represents
the channel state (symbolic feedback) and a parameter that
represents the goodness of the task implemented at the receiver (semantic feedback), like image classification or image
regeneration: when the channel is very good, more parameters
are sent, thus enabling an accurate recovery; conversely, when
the channel is very poor, fewer parameters are transmitted, but
they are still the most relevant ones.
As an example of application, we evaluated the proposed
architecture under different channel conditions and using two
image benchmarks, namely MNIST and CIFAR10. The goal
of the receiver is to classify the images by processing the
received latent variables. However, the receiver does not have

6

Recognition
Model

Latent Space

Channel

...

Source

Generative
Model

Corrupted
Received Information
Destination

Fig. 4. A generative semantic communication framework based on latent variable models.

VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed an approach to semantic
communications based on three main tools: knowledge representation using topological spaces; design of the source encoder based on the information bottleneck; use of a variational

   
  
 & O D V V L I L F D W L R Q  $ F F X U D F \

access to the true latent variables, as they are corrupted from
the propagation through the wireless channel. Then we tested
how robust is the generative model, and as a consequence the
classification task, as a function of the distortion, assessed
through the Peak-Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (PSNR), defined as
the ratio between the maximum power of a signal and the
power of the corrupting noise. Furthermore, to simulate the
variability of the wireless channel, we conducted our tests
on a dynamic channel scenario, where the channel varies at
random over different time slots. To simulate channel random
fading, we vary the PSNR randomly over different time slots.
In the static channel condition, we always transmit the same
amount of information by fixing the dimension of the latent
vector to 4, for each benchmark. The information is therefore
only degraded due to the channel noise, but it maintains the
same dimension. On the contrary, under dynamic channel
conditions, we dynamically adapt the dimension of the latent
vector to be sent as a function of the channel state. Table I
shows the results of the experimental evaluation as a function
of the PSNR, while Figure 5 shows the classification accuracy
for different latent dimensions. From Table I, we observe that
the classification accuracy decreases as the PSNR decreases,
as expected, but the scheme is rather robust against noise. It is
worth noting that the dynamic adaptation of the latent space
dimension achieves similar performance, even sending fewer
latent variables, on average. However, the most striking feature
of the proposed architecture is that the system works quite well
even sending very few data. This aspect is made more evident
in Fig. 5, where we plot the classification accuracy vs. the
dimension of the transmitted latent vector, for two different
values of the PSNR. From the figure it is evident how, in the
MNIST case, the number of features to be sent to achieve good
classification accuracy can be extremely low. The situation is
a bit more complex with the CFAR 10 data-set, but still the
number of data to be sent is strikingly low compared to the
original images. Again, we can observe a relative robustness
against channel noise.

  
  
 & , ) $ 5    3 6 1 5     
 & , ) $ 5    3 6 1 5    
 0 1 , 6 7  3 6 1 5     
 0 1 , 6 7  3 6 1 5    

  

 

 

 
  
 / D W H Q W  ' L P H Q V L R Q

  

  

Fig. 5. Classification accuracy with channel conditions equal to PSNR=100
and PSNR=10 varying the latent dimension from 1 to 64.

autoencoder to apply the information bottleneck to the most
general case. More specifically, we used a generative latent
variable model as a way to extract semantic information in
the form of latent variables. The distinguishing feature of
our scheme is that we can adapt the number of variables to
be transmitted, depending on the wireless channel state and
on the accuracy of the decisions taken at the receiver side.
Furthermore, we tested the robustness of the generative part
when working on a set of latent variables distorted by the
propagation through a wireless channel.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. Strinati Calvanese and S. Barbarossa, “6G networks: Beyond Shannon towards semantic and goal-oriented communications,” Computer
Networks, vol. 190, pp. 1–17, 2021.
[2] Warren Weaver, “Recent contributions to the mathematical theory of
communication,” ETC: a review of general semantics, pp. 261–281,
1953.
[3] Chris R Sims, “Rate–distortion theory and human perception,” Cognition, vol. 152, pp. 181–198, 2016.
[4] Rudolf Carnap, Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, et al., “An outline of a theory of
semantic information,” Tech. Rep. no. 247, MIT, Oct. 27, 1952.
[5] Marios Kountouris and Nikolaos Pappas, “Semantics-empowered communication for networked intelligent systems,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 96–102, 2021.
[6] Eirina Bourtsoulatze, David Burth Kurka, and Deniz Gündüz, “Deep
joint source-channel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE

7

Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no.
3, pp. 567–579, 2019.
[7] Mikolaj Jankowski, Deniz Gündüz, and Krystian Mikolajczyk, “Wireless
image retrieval at the edge,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 89–100, 2020.
[8] Huiqiang Xie, Zhijin Qin, Geoffrey Ye Li, and Biing-Hwang Juang,
“Deep learning enabled semantic communication systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 69, pp. 2663–2675, 2021.
[9] Zhenzi Weng, Zhijin Qin, and Geoffrey Ye Li, “Semantic communications for speech recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.11190, 2021.
[10] Huiqiang Xie, Zhijin Qin, Xiaoming Tao, and Khaled B Letaief, “Taskoriented multi-user semantic communications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2584–2597, 2022.
[11] Mohammad Karimzadeh Farshbafan, Walid Saad, and Merouane Debbah, “Common language for goal-oriented semantic communications:
A curriculum learning framework,” in ICC 2022-IEEE International
Conference on Communications. IEEE, 2022, pp. 1710–1715.
[12] Peiwen Jiang, Chao-Kai Wen, Shi Jin, and Geoffrey Ye Li, “Wireless
semantic communications for video conferencing,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 230–244, 2023.
[13] Michel Chein and Marie-Laure Mugnier, Graph-based knowledge representation: computational foundations of conceptual graphs, Springer
Science & Business Media, 2008.
[14] Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William Bialek, “The information bottleneck method,” arXiv preprint physics/0004057, 2000.
[15] Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz, “Score-based generative
modeling in latent space,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2021, vol. 34, pp. 11287–11302.

Sergio Barbarossa is a Full Professor at Sapienza University of Rome and a
Senior Research Fellow with the Sapienza School of Advanced Studies, Rome,
Italy. He is an IEEE Fellow and a EURASIP Fellow. His current research
interests include semantic and goal-oriented communications, topological
signal processing and learning.

Danilo Comminiello is an Associate Professor with the DIET Dept. at
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. His research interests concern the design
of modern artificial intelligence algorithms, including neural networks and
generative models. He is an elected member of the IEEE Machine Learning
for Signal Processing Technical Committee.

Eleonora Grassucci is currently an assistant professor at DIET Dept. of
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy. She was awarded of the Best Track
Manuscript Recognition by the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society in 2022.

Francesco Pezone is a Ph.D. student in Data Science at Sapienza University
of Rome, Italy, jointly with the Technical University of Berlin, Germany.
His current research interests include Semantic Communication and Deep
Learning for Data Compression.

Stefania Sardellitti is an assistant professor at Sapienza University of Rome.
She received the 2014 and the 2020 IEEE Best Paper Awards from the IEEE
Signal Processing Society. Her current research interests are in the area of
topological signal processing.

Paolo Di Lorenzo is an Associate Professor at Sapienza University of
Rome. His research interests include topological signal processing, distributed
optimization, wireless edge intelligence, goal-oriented and semantic communications. He is recipient of the 2022 EURASIP Early Career Award. He has
received three best student conference paper awards sponsored by the IEEE
signal processing society and EURASIP.

