UNDER REVIEW FOR IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS

1

Improving Channel Resilience for Task-Oriented
Semantic Communications: A Unified Information
Bottleneck Approach

arXiv:2405.00135v1 [cs.IT] 30 Apr 2024

Shuai Lyu, Yao Sun, Senior Member, IEEE, Linke Guo, Member, IEEE, Xiaoyong Yuan, Fang Fang, Senior
Member, IEEE, Lan Zhang, Member, IEEE, Xianbin Wang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Task-oriented semantic communications (TSC) enhance radio resource efficiency by transmitting task-relevant
semantic information. However, current research often overlooks
the inherent semantic distinctions among encoded features. Due
to unavoidable channel variations from time and frequencyselective fading, semantically sensitive feature units could be more
susceptible to erroneous inference if corrupted by dynamic channels. Therefore, this letter introduces a unified channel-resilient
TSC framework via information bottleneck. This framework
complements existing TSC approaches by controlling information
flow to capture fine-grained feature-level semantic robustness.
Experiments on a case study for real-time subchannel allocation
validate the framework’s effectiveness.
Index Terms—Channel resilience, Information bottleneck, Taskoriented semantic communications, Radio resource allocation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

F

UTURE wireless networks are expected to support dramatically increased data traffic, driven primarily by the
prevalence of sensing capabilities, distributed computing resources, and ongoing convergence with vertical applications,
including transportation, online gaming and smart utilities. To
support the unprecedented traffic growth with limited radio
resources, task-oriented semantic communications (TSC) have
garnered considerable interest [1], [2]. Unlike conventional bitlevel communications, TSC leverages both distributed computing resources as well as the most recent artificial intelligence
(AI) techniques to extract and transmit task-relevant semantic
information, thereby reducing unnecessary traffic and enhancing
radio resource utilization efficiency.
In TSC, a transceiver typically integrates semantic and channel coding functions to extract task-relevant semantic features
and enable efficient transmissions [2]. Yang et al. introduced a
novel compression method for AI tasks to improve transmission
efficiency, demonstrated with a prototype for surface defect
detection [3]. Instead of focusing solely on semantic coding,
This work was supported by the US National Science Foundation (NSF)
under Grants CCF-2106754, CCF-2221741, CCF-2418308, and CCF-2151238.
Shuai Lyu, Linke Guo, Xiaoyong Yuan, and Lan Zhang (the corresponding
author) are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Clemson University, SC, USA (e-mail: {slv; linkeg; xiaoyon; lan7}@clemson.edu).
Yao Sun is with the James Watt School of Engineering, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow, U.K. (e-mail: Yao.Sun@glasgow.ac.uk).
Xianbin Wang and Fang Fang are with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, and Fang Fang is also with the Department of Computer
Science, Western University, London, ON, Canada (e-mail: {xianbin.wang;
fang.fang}@uwo.ca).

Shao et al. [4] and Sun et al. [5] proposed to jointly optimize
semantic and channel coding based on information bottleneck to
balance semantic distortion and transmission efficiency. Moreover, TSC problems have been investigated in multi-user and
multi-modality scenarios [6]–[8].
Despite considerable efforts, existing TSC research primarily
focuses on statistical channel conditions, assuming a certain
channel condition when transmitting an input sample [2]–[7].
However, the encoded features may encounter distinct physical
impairments during transmission. For instance, in orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems, multiple
subcarriers with different frequency-selective fading are used
for signal transmission across a wide bandwidth [9]. Consequently, if semantically sensitive feature units are allocated
to poorly performing subcarriers, the corrupted features are
more susceptible to erroneous task inference. While channel
estimation techniques can evaluate instantaneous channel conditions in practice [9], the evaluation results cannot effectively
guide feature-level transmissions due to the neglected semantic
distinctions among encoded feature units.
To bridge the gap between feature-level semantic distinctions
and channel variations, this letter introduces an innovative TSC
framework to improve channel resilience by evaluating and
prioritizing encoded feature units of input data based on their robustness against channel variations. This framework is designed
to be complementarily leveraged by existing TSC approaches to
capture fine-grained feature-level semantic robustness, thereby
adjusting transmission strategies for channel-resilient TSC. The
primary contributions of this letter are summarized below.
• Unified channel-resilience framework: We develop a unified approach to analyze a well-trained TSC transceiver for
channel resilience, providing a soft robustness mask for the
encoded feature space without modifying the established
TSC encoding and decoding functions. This mask will
be utilized to prioritize robust feature units and adapt
the transmission strategies against instantaneous channel
variations in practice.
• Robustness mask based on information bottleneck (IB): We
construct the robustness mask for encoded feature units by
leveraging IB to regulate information flow with explicitly
added artificial noise. Based on the task inference sensitivity, this mask softly disentangles the encoded features
into robust and non-robust from the semantic level.
• Numerical evaluation. We conduct experiments for real-

UNDER REVIEW FOR IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS

2

time subchannel allocation problems as a case study.
Evaluation results under two image tasks demonstrate
the framework’s effectiveness, especially under highly dynamic adverse channel conditions.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL
This paper considers a typical task-oriented semantic communications (TSC) system. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the source
transceiver comprises semantic and channel encoders. Given
an input sample x ∈ XT of task T with the inherent taskspecific semantic information y ∈ YT , e.g., the target label,
the source transceiver first extracts the semantic information
of x with the semantic encoder and then processes it via the
channel encoder. The encoded features are given by z = Eφ (x),
which is also represented as z = {z1 , . . . , zm }, consisting m
vectors. Note that we denote Eφ as the joint semantic and
channel encoding function for ease of representation, which
is consistent with many existing TSC works [4], [8], [10].
Encoded features z are then transmitted through the physical
channel to the destination transceiver, and the received signal
can be given by ẑ = Hz + n, ẑ = {ẑ1 , . . . , ẑm }, where H
denotes the channel matrix and n ∼ N (0, γ 2 I) denotes the
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). The received signal is
subsequently processed via a channel decoder and a semantic
decoder. Similar to the source transceiver, we denote Dθ as the
joint channel and semantic decoding function and derive the
reconstructed semantic information ŷ = Dθ (ẑ).
The workflow of the above TSC system can be formulated
as a probabilistic graphical model: Y ↔ X ↔ Z ↔ Ẑ ↔ Ŷ .
In the following, we use upper-case letters, e.g., X, and lowercase letters, e.g., x, to represent random matrices and their realizations, respectively. Existing TSC research primarily focused
on reducing the size of encoded features z = {z1 , . . . , zm }
while ensuring reconstruction performance of semantic information [2]–[7]. To achieve this, encoding and decoding functions, i.e., Eφ at the source transceiver and Dθ at the destination
transceiver, are strategically optimized. We refer readers to
recent TSC works [1]–[7] for more details.
III. C HANNEL -R ESILIENT TSC F RAMEWORK
A. Design Intuition
While TSC systems have been extensively studied [1]–[7],
existing research mainly considers statistical channel conditions
to optimize semantic and channel coding functions, assuming
that all encoded features of an input sample are transmitted
under the same channel condition. However, this assumption
may not hold true in practice. For instance, in OFDM systems, multiple subcarriers are used to simultaneously transmit
data across a wide band [9]. Hence, encoded features may
suffer distinct channel impairments due to different frequencyselective fading between subcarriers. Although instantaneous
channel state information (CSI) can be monitored using estimation techniques, such as pilot symbols embedded in OFDM
symbols, the adaptation of transmission strategies is designed to
maximize the successful delivery of OFDM symbols. The focus
remains on optimizing bit-level transmission performance, i.e.,

Fig. 1. Overview of channel-resilient TSC framework. Blue arrows indicate IBbased channel-resilient analysis; black arrows indicate transmission procedures
in the TSC system.

duplicating all encoded features, rather than semantic inference.
In other words, feature units across the encoded signal are
assumed equally robust against channel variations. However,
feature units may affect semantic inference differently, e.g., the
semantically sensitive or non-robust units are more susceptible
to erroneous task inference if corrupted by poor channel conditions. To address these limitations, this letter introduces an
innovative framework for channel-resilient TSC by evaluating
and prioritizing encoded feature units based on their robustness
against channel variations. The framework offers a unified
solution to complement existing TSC approaches from two
perspectives:
The framework seamlessly integrates with existing TSC
approaches by analyzing a well-trained TSC transceiver.
Specifically, a soft robustness mask is created for the
encoded feature space without modifying the established
TSC encoding and decoding functions, i.e., Eφ and Dθ .
• The robustness mask aims to align semantic-level feature
units with instantaneous channel variations. The mask with
feature-level semantic distinctions guides transceivers to
efficiently adjust transmission strategies based on instantaneous CSI, aiming for task-specific semantic inference.

•

To achieve this goal, we leverage information bottleneck
(IB) [11] to analyze the encoded feature space by explicitly
adding artificial noise to synthesize channel variations. Based on
the semantic inference sensitivity of artificial noise intervention,
a soft feature robustness mask is generated to indicate how
encoded feature units corrupted by channel variations affect
semantic inference with assigned information. In the following,
we first present the IB reformulation to control information flow
for channel resilience purposes and then provide a tractable
solution to obtain the robustness mask. Finally, a case study of
leveraging the mask for subchannel allocation is introduced.

B. Information Bottleneck Reformulation
IB is an information theoretical design principle that aims to
find the best tradeoff between accuracy and complexity [11].
Several recent works leveraged the IB principle in TSC to seek
the tradeoff between transmission rate and semantic information
distortion [4], [12]. Following the aforementioned probabilistic
graphical model in Section II, Y ↔ X ↔ Z ↔ Ẑ ↔ Ŷ , the

UNDER REVIEW FOR IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS

3

objective of optimizing the encoding and decoding functions,
i.e., φ and θ, based on the IB principle can be given by
min L(φ, θ) = −I(Ẑ, Y ) + βI(Ẑ, X),

s.t. Z̃ = Z + σ · ϵ,

(5)

(1)

where I is the mutual information; β is the Lagrange multiplier
that regulates the amount of information in feature space Ẑ. In
(1), the first term minimizes semantic distortion by allowing
the received encoded features Ẑ to be predictive on semantic
information Y , and the second term maximizes transmission
rate by enforcing the compression from the input X to received
encoded features Ẑ.
Instead, this paper intends to improve the channel resilience
of a well-trained TSC transceiver, whose encoding and decoding
functions (φ, θ) are frozen. To estimate how each encoded feature corrupted by channel variations affect semantic inference,
we resue the objective in (1) by introducing the artificial noise
σ to control the information flow and estimate the robustness of
the encoded features. Thus, the objective function of robustness
estimation for channel-resilient TSC can be formulated as
min L(σ) = −I(Z̃, Y |φ, θ) + βI(Z̃, X|φ, θ),

Then, we derive the new form of I(Z̃, Y ) as
Z
I(Z̃, Y ) ∼
= p(y, z̃) log p(y|z̃)dydz̃

(2)

where Z̃ stands for artificially corrupted encoded features by
injecting the artificial noise σ to encoded features Z = Eφ (X).
Hence, we derive Z̃ ∼ N (Eφ (X), σ 2 ). The operator · in (2)
denotes the Hadamard product, and ϵ represents the Gaussian
noise sampled from N (0, I). The noise variation here measures
the correlation between the encoded features and the inferred
semantic information based on the fact that robustness refers to
a high correlation on semantic inference and non-robustness is
opposite [13]. As (φ, θ) are frozen throughout the optimization
for channel resilience analysis, we exclude φ and θ in the
following notation for simplicity.

=

To calculate the achievable artificial noise, we resolve the
difficulty of mutual information computation in (2) by deriving
the upper bound of the objective function. We start with the
first term I(Z̃, Y ). Writing it out in full, this becomes
Z
p(y, z̃)
dydz̃
I(Z̃, Y ) = p(y, z̃) log
p(y)p(z̃)
Z
(3)
= p(y, z̃) log p(y|z̃)dydz̃ + H(Y ),
where p(y) and p(z̃) are the probability of the semantic information and encoded features with artificial noise, respectively.
H(Y ) is the entropy of the semantic information that is independent to the optimization and thus ignored. Recalling the
probabilistic graphical model Y ↔ X ↔ Z, we rewrite p(y, z̃)
based on the underlying characteristics of the Markov chain,
Z
p(y, z̃) = p(x)p(z|x)p(z̃|z)p(y|z̃)dxdz.
(4)

[−L(Y, Dθ (Z̃))].

X∼p(X),Z∼pφ (Z|X),Z̃∼p(Z̃|Z)

Since we evaluate the robustness of the encoded features from
a well-trained TSC transceiver, we have pφ (Z|X) and Dθ (Z̃).
Besides, the corrupted features with artificial noise are given
by Z̃ ∼ N (Eφ (X), σ 2 ). Thus, we can obtain the upper bound
of I(Z̃, Y ).
Next, we focus on the second mutual information, I(Z̃, X),
in (2) and have
Z
p(z̃, x)
dz̃dx
I(Z̃, X) = p(z̃, x) log
p(z̃)p(x)
Z
p(z̃|x)
= p(z̃, x) log
dzdz̃dx
p(z)
(6)
Z
p(z)
+ p(z̃, x) log
dzdz̃dx
p(z̃)
= KL[p(Z̃|X)||p(Z)] − KL[p(Z̃)||p(Z)],
where KL represents Kullback–Leibler divergence that measures the difference between two probability distributions. Since
KL[p(Z̃)||p(Z)] ≥ 0, we have
I(Z̃, X) ≤ KL[p(Z̃|X)||p(Z)]
m
δ2
1 X σk2
[ 2 + log k2 − 1],
=
2
δk
σk

(7)

k=1

where k denotes the index of the artificial noise variation added
to the kth encoded feature unit, i.e., σ = [σ1 , · · · , σm ], and
δ = [δ1 , · · · , δm ] represents the inherent variation of an input
reflected in the encoded feature space for task T .
Built on the above derivation, we obtain the upper bound of
the objective function in (2) as
L(σ) ≤

C. Upper Bound of the IB-based Robustness Estimation

E

E

X∼p(X),Z∼pφ (Z|X),Z̃∼N (Eφ (X),σ 2 )
n
1 X σk2
δ2
− β(
[ 2 + log k2 − 1]).
2
δ
σk
k=1 k

[−L(Y, Dθ (Z̃))]

(8)
Therefore, by propagating Z̃ through the decoding function,
the artificial noise can be optimized by σ = σ − ∂L(σ)
∂σ .
D. Robustness Mask and Case Study
After optimizing artificial noise σ, we analyze the artificially
corrupted encoded features Z̃ and assess the robustness of each
feature unit based on its sensitivity to semantic inference. Define
the encoded feature variation of task T by R = max(δ 2 ),
which represents the maximal input variations mapping to the
encoded feature space Z. Intuitively, the injected artificial noise
should be restricted below R to ensure inference reliability.
However, recent research indicates that the correlation between
different units in the feature space and inference performance
are different [13]. Thus, feature unit zk ∈ z = {z1 , . . . , zm }
with a high correlation to inference results should have σk2 > R,

UNDER REVIEW FOR IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS

IV. N UMERICAL E VALUATION
We consider two tasks for TSC on image classification, i.e.,
CIFAR-10 [14] and Street View House Numbers (SVHN) [15]
datasets. We adopt the VGG16 [16] architecture as the encoding
function Eφ and three fully connected layers as the decoding
function Dθ . Without loss of generality, we use the widely
used additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel as the
general channel model to train the TSC transceiver, i.e., the
encoding and decoding functions, Eφ and Dθ , that are frozen
for channel resilience analysis. Besides, we consider a typical
OFDM symbol structure with a total of 272 subcarriers. For
each OFDM symbol, 16 pilots are evenly distributed across
256 data subcarriers [17]. The number of encoded feature units
is 512. The hyperparameter β of IB is empirically set as 0.3.
B. Evaluation Results
We first evaluate the effectiveness of the robustness mask for
encoded feature units on the CIFAR-10 task. According to the
robustness scores, we rerank encoded feature units. The units in
the first half, which have higher scores, are expected to be more
resilient against channel variations than those in the second

Dimension 1

Dimension 1

(a) First-half feature units,
ideal channel

Dimension 2

A. Evaluation Setup

Dimension 2

This mask can be leveraged by a well-trained TSC transceiver
(i.e., given Eφ and Dθ ) for a specific task T to accommodate
instantaneous channel variations. Based on the robustness score,
priority is provided for transmitting the encoded feature units
to achieve reliable semantic inference.
We conduct a case study to leverage the robustness mask r
for subchannel allocation. Feature units with a small robustness
score are considered non-robust against channel impairments,
which should be assigned to high-quality subchannels that are
measured by channel estimation techniques [9]. Given a total of
s available subchannels with distinct subchannel conditions, we
leverage a greedy-based method to assign the s subchannels to
the m encoded feature units based on their robustness mask r.
The allocation problem is thus redefined as a direct one-to-one
pairing problem, which is greedily solved with a computational
complexity of O(m), where m represents the count of encoded
feature units. The pseudocode of the robustness mask-based
subchannel allocation is given in Algorithm 1.

(b) Second-half feature
units, ideal channel

Dimension 2

Remark: By optimizing σk ∈ σ for each unit of the encoded
features, the IB-based problem formulation in (2) controls the
information flow to the decoding function and evaluates feature
unit robustness. For task T , we approximate X ∼ p(X) with
empirical risk minimization. Hence, the soft robustness mask
of feature unit zk ∈ z = {z1 , . . . , zm } is given by
P
m
X
σki
T
,
rk = 1.
(9)
rk = P xi ∈XP
m
j
xj ∈XT
l=1 σl
k=1

Algorithm 1 Channel-Resilient TSC: Subchannel Allocation
Input: (1) a well-trained TSC transceiver with encoding function Eφ and decoding function Dθ ; (2) input data and its
corresponding semantic information (x, y) ∈ (XT , YT ); (3)
instantaneous CSI = {CSI1 , . . . , CSIs } for s subchannels;
Output: (1) robustness mask (2) subchannel assignment
// Robustness mask generation
1) Encode: z = Eφ (x) = {z1 , . . . , zm }, x ∈ XT .
2) Initialize artificial noise: σ = 0 with a neutral noise.
3) For each iteration:
a) Adjust noise: σ = log(1+exp(σ)), ensure positive
through SoftPlus.
b) Inject noise: z̃ = z + σ · ϵ based on (2).
c) Decode: ŷ = Dθ (z̃).
based on (8).
d) Update: σ = σ − ∂L(σ)
∂σ
4) End For
5) Robustness mask: r = {r1 , . . . , rm } based on (9).
// Robustness mask implementation: assign subchannels
1) For iteration l ∈ {1, . . . , m} do:
a) Select the smallest ri ∈ r and remove ri from r;
b) Select the best CSIj ∈ CSI;
c) Assign zi to the jth subchannel;
d) If the jth subchannel is fully occupied, remove it
from CSI;
2) End for

Dimension 2

i.e., robust against channel impairment, and zk with σk2 < R is
non-robust since small channel impairment behaves as a strict
restriction to retain semantic inference performance. Therefore,
we explicitly disentangle encoded features into robust and nonrobust against channel variations for TSC.

4

Dimension 1

(c) First-half feature units,
noisy channel

Dimension 1

(d) Second-half feature
units, noisy channel

Fig. 2. Comparison of feature-level channel resilience between the ideal (noise
= 0) and noisy (SNR = 0) channel conditions.

half, which have lower scores. Fig. 2 visualizes the featurelevel inference performance between ideal and noisy channel
conditions using 2D t-SNE. In ideal channel environments,
i.e., no noise, both robust (first-half) feature units and nonrobust (second-half) feature units achieve comparable inference
performance. However, under noisy conditions, i.e., SNR = 0,

UNDER REVIEW FOR IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS

5

V. C ONCLUSION

(a) High Variance, CIFAR-10

(b) Low Variance, CIFAR-10

This letter introduced an innovative framework for channelresilient task-oriented semantic communications (TSC), which
analyzes the encoded feature space of a well-trained TSC
transceiver. A robustness mask for encoded feature units is
created based on the information bottleneck, which was implemented for subchannel allocation as a case study. The
effectiveness of this framework was validated on two TSC tasks.
To the best of our knowledge, this letter is the first to explore
feature-level channel resilience for TSC against instantaneous
channel variations.
R EFERENCES

(c) High Variance, SVHN

(d) Low Variance, SVHN

Fig. 3. Comparison of inference performance between dynamic (high variation,
15) and stable (low variation, 2) subchannel environments on CIFAR-10 and
SVHN tasks.

the performance disparity between the robust and non-robust
feature units becomes apparent. Despite channel impairments,
the first half of the units with higher robustness scores maintain
performance levels similar to those in ideal conditions ((a) vs.
(c)), whereas the performance of the second half deteriorates
significantly ((b) vs. (d)). This contrast demonstrates the effectiveness of the robustness mask in evaluating feature-level
channel resilience.
We then evaluate the effectiveness of using the robustness
mask for subchannel allocation between two AWGN environments characterized by low and high variations. The low
variation represents stable subchannel environments, while the
high variation denotes highly dynamic discrepancies between
subcarriers, regardless of their average performance. Fig. 3
illustrates the inference accuracy with on-average subchannel
performance (SNR) between different channel variances on two
image classification tasks. Specifically, Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(c)
present inference performance under highly dynamic subchannel conditions. We compare our method against two baselines:
random and worst-case allocations, the latter assigning the
lowest-quality subchannels (low SNR) to the least robust feature
units (low robustness score). We observe that our method
consistently outperforms the baselines across all SNR levels,
which demonstrates its effectiveness. As the SNR increases, the
performance gap between our method and the baselines narrows
on both datasets. This suggests that satisfactory average subchannel performance can compensate for subchannel variations.
The advantage of our method is particularly notable in highly
dynamic and challenging channel conditions. Furthermore, by
comparing Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 3(d), we observe a marginal difference between the three methods in stable channel environments.
This consistently validates our finding above.

[1] T. M. Getu, G. Kaddoum, and M. Bennis, “A survey on goal-oriented
semantic communication: Techniques, challenges, and future directions,”
IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 51 223–51 274, 2024.
[2] D. Gündüz, Z. Qin, I. E. Aguerri, H. S. Dhillon, Z. Yang, A. Yener, K. K.
Wong, and C.-B. Chae, “Beyond transmitting bits: Context, semantics,
and task-oriented communications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 5–41, 2022.
[3] Y. Yang, C. Guo, F. Liu, C. Liu, L. Sun, Q. Sun, and J. Chen, “Semantic
communications with artificial intelligence tasks: Reducing bandwidth
requirements and improving artificial intelligence task performance,”
IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 4–13, 2022.
[4] J. Shao, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Learning task-oriented communication
for edge inference: An information bottleneck approach,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 197–211, 2021.
[5] L. Sun, Y. Yang, M. Chen, C. Guo, W. Saad, and H. V. Poor, “Adaptive
information bottleneck guided joint source and channel coding for image
transmission,” IEEE journal on selected areas in communications, vol. 41,
no. 8, pp. 2628–2644, 2023.
[6] H. Xie, Z. Qin, and G. Y. Li, “Task-oriented multi-user semantic communications for VQA,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 11,
no. 3, pp. 553–557, 2021.
[7] C. Liu, C. Guo, Y. Yang, and N. Jiang, “Adaptable semantic compression and resource allocation for task-oriented communications,”
IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, 2023,
doi:10.1109/TCCN.2023.3346481.
[8] F. Zhao, G. Bagwe, E. Mohammed, L. Feng, L. Zhang, and Y. Sun,
“Joint computing resource and bandwidth allocation for semantic communication networks,” in 2023 IEEE 98th Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC2023-Fall). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[9] S. Coleri, M. Ergen, A. Puri, and A. Bahai, “Channel estimation techniques based on pilot arrangement in ofdm systems,” IEEE Transactions
on broadcasting, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 223–229, 2002.
[10] S. Ma, W. Qiao, Y. Wu, H. Li, G. Shi, D. Gao, Y. Shi, S. Li,
and N. Al-Dhahir, “Task-oriented explainable semantic communications,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 12, pp.
9248–9262, 2023.
[11] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck
method,” arXiv preprint physics/0004057, 2000.
[12] S. Xie, S. Ma, M. Ding, Y. Shi, M. Tang, and Y. Wu, “Robust information
bottleneck for task-oriented communication with digital modulation,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 41, no. 8, pp.
2577–2591, 2023.
[13] D. Tsipras, S. Santurkar, L. Engstrom, A. Turner, and A. Madry, “Robustness may be at odds with accuracy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12152,
2018.
[14] A. Krizhevsky, G. Hinton et al., “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” 2009.
[15] Y. Netzer, T. Wang, A. Coates, A. Bissacco, B. Wu, A. Y. Ng et al.,
“Reading digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning,” in
NIPS workshop on deep learning and unsupervised feature learning, vol.
2011, no. 5. Granada, Spain, 2011, pp. 1–9.
[16] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[17] C. Liu, C. Guo, Y. Yang, W. Ni, and T. Q. Quek, “OFDM-based digital
semantic communication with importance awareness,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.02178, 2024.

