1

Disentangled Information Bottleneck guided
Privacy-Protective JSCC for Image Transmission

arXiv:2309.10263v1 [cs.CR] 19 Sep 2023

Lunan Sun, Yang Yang, Member, IEEE, Mingzhe Chen, Member, IEEE, Caili Guo, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Joint source and channel coding (JSCC) has attracted increasing attention due to its robustness and high
efficiency. However, JSCC is vulnerable to privacy leakage due
to the high relevance between the source image and channel
input. In this paper, we propose a disentangled information bottleneck guided privacy-protective JSCC (DIB-PPJSCC) for image
transmission, which aims at protecting private information and
achieving superior communication performance. In particular,
we propose a DIB objective to compress the private information
in public subcodewords and improve the reconstruction quality
simultaneously. To optimize JSCC neural networks using the
DIB objective, we derive a differentiable estimation based on
variational approximation and the density-ratio trick. Additionally, we design a password-based privacy-protective algorithm
that encrypts the private subcodewords, achieving joint optimization with JSCC neural networks. The proposed algorithm
involves an encryptor for encrypting private information and
a decryptor for recovering it at the legitimate receiver. A loss
function is derived based on the maximum entropy principle for
jointly training the encryptor, decryptor, and JSCC decoder to
maximize eavesdropping uncertainty and improve reconstruction
quality. Experimental results show that DIB-PPJSCC reduces
eavesdropping accuracy on private information by up to 15%
and decreases inference time by 10%.
Index Terms—Information bottleneck, joint source and channel
coding, image transmission, privacy protection.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Shannon’s information theory has laid the cornerstone of
modern communication systems. In particular, Shannon’s separation theorem pointed out that separate source and channel coding (SSCC) is optimal for a memoryless source and
channel when the latency, complexity, and code length are not
constrained [1]. However, the assumption of potentially infinite
code lengths is impractical in real-world scenarios, and thus
SSCC is suboptimal for finite code lengths. Additionally, to
achieve theoretically optimal performance, maximum likelihood detection methods must be used, which is generally NPhard [2], thus introducing high computational complexity and
leading to unacceptable latency. Moreover, the envisioned sixth
generation (6G) of wireless networks are expected to support
a wide range of services and applications, such as ugmented
reality, medical imaging and autonomous vehicles [3], which
have strict latency requirement [4]. Therefore, SSCC may not
be able to meet the demands of 6G.
To address these challenges, joint source and channel coding
(JSCC) has attracted increasing attention as a means to achieve
reliable data transmission. In the initial stage, the studies
on JSCC focus on coding schemes [5], [6] or performance
analysis under ideal channel or source assumptions [7], [8].
However, these hand-crafted coding schemes may require

additional tuning. Recently, deep learning (DL) based approaches have been proposed for JSCC, driven by the rapid
advancements in artificial intelligence (AI). Specifically, since
images possess larger dimensions compared to speech and text
data, there exists more information redundancy in images, and
transmitting image data requires a higher rate than transmitting
speech and text data. Therefore, DL-based JSCC system for
image transmissions has attracted a plethora of prior art,
and these works have exhibited appealing properties in terms
of image restoration quality [9]–[11], flexibility [12], and
robustness [13].
However, the aforementioned studies mainly aim at improving the system performance, while ignoring the potential
adversarial eavesdroppers and privacy leakage during image
transmission. To enhance security, recent studies combined existing hand-crafted encryption schemes with DL-based JSCC
to encrypt the transmitted information [14], [15]. However, the
introduction of encryption schemes may lead to high computational complexity and a reduction of image reconstruction
quality [16]. Some other studies on JSCC for image transmission have taken into account the protection of specific private
information [17], [18] by adversarially training the JSCC
encoder/decoder and the hypothetical eavesdropper to discard
the private information in the codeword before transmission.
However, the loss of private information can lead to significant
degradation in terms of the image reconstruction quality.
Therefore, a privacy-protective JSCC that not only safeguards
private information but also achieves superior communication
performance at the legitimate receiver deserves investigation.
A. Related work and Motivations
The existing works on DL-based JSCC for image transmission typically model the communication system as an
end-to-end deep neural network (DNN)-based autoencoder
(AE) [9]–[15], [17]–[19]. The seminal work [9] proposed an
AE-based JSCC architecture called deep JSCC to minimize
the reconstruction distortion, which outperforms conventional
SSCC under the Gaussian channel and slow Rayleigh fading
channel. Based on [9], the authors in [19] exploited the channel feedback and further improved the reconstruction quality
of deep JSCC. To deal with the performance degradation
caused by the variations of signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs),
the authors in [12] employed a channel-wise soft attention
network to adapt to varying channel conditions. The above
studies concentrate on DL-based JSCC with the Gaussian
channel and the Rayleigh channel. For the discrete channel
such as the binary symmetric channel (BSC), the authors in

2

[10] designed a discrete variational autoencoder (VAE)-based
deep JSCC model and maximized the mutual information
between the source and noisy codewords. The authors in [13]
further developed a JSCC model to maximize the mutual
information between the source and the codewords based on
[10]. Both works in [10] and [13] focused on minimizing the
reconstruction distortion while ignoring the required rate. In
contrast, the authors in [11] proposed an adaptive information
bottleneck (IB) guided JSCC which jointly minimized the
distortion and the rate, aligning with the rate-distortion theory.
Even though interesting, these DL-based JSCC studies for
image transmission aim at reducing reconstruction errors while
ignoring the security and privacy aspects of JSCC. Recently,
the authors in [14] considered the joint encryption and sourcechannel coding and placed the encryption module in front of
the JSCC encoder. The raw images were directly encrypted
using the discrete cosine transform (DCT) and then input into
the JSCC encoder. The authors in [15] followed a different
approach by positioning the encryption process behind the
JSCC encoder and employing a key cryptographic scheme
to encrypt the output of the JSCC encoder. In [14], all
pixels in the raw image were encrypted, while in [15], all
the extracted semantic information from the raw image was
encrypted. Both methods encrypted the entire information of
the raw image. In fact, the privacy protection goal is to protect
specific private information rather than entire information
mostly, and encrypting entire information can lead to extra
computation and storage costs [20], [21]. Moreover, encrypting
and decrypting entire information may result in a larger
reconstruction error [22]. To tackle this issue, the work in [17]
first considered the DL-based JSCC that aimed at protecting
specific private information and proposed an adversarially
trained JSCC with Gaussian channels. The main objective
of their neural networks is minimizing the reconstruction
distortion while minimizing the mutual information between
the private information and the noisy codewords received by
the eavesdropper. Furthermore, the authors in [18] introduced
a VAE-based JSCC model for privacy protection with BSC.
They jointly minimized the reconstruction distortion and the
mutual information between the private information and the
noisy codewords received by the eavesdropper, as well as
maximizing the mutual information between the raw image
and the codewords extracted by the JSCC encoder. However,
these works discarded the information related to private information during image transmission. The legitimate receiver
had no access to private information, thus severely damaging
the reconstruction quality.
To solve these challenges, we need to separate private
information and public information and protect private information without altering public information. However, existing
JSCC studies cannot distinguish between private and public
information due to the inexplicability of neural networks. Recently, the authors in [23] introduced an information-theoretic
principle for neural networks, termed IB, which extracts
information relevant to target prediction while compressing
information irrelevant to target prediction. Since IB gives
an information-theoretic explanation for neural networks, it
enables the neural networks to disentangle the target-relevant

and the target-irrelevant information [24]. Therefore, we propose a novel disentangled IB guided privacy-protective JSCC
(DIB-PPJSCC) that is able to disentangle private and public
information. However, the information-theoretic principle in
[23] is designed for image classification and does not consider
communication over channel. Thus, it is not suitable for
the considered scenario where images are transmitted over
channel and recovered by the receiver. In addition, traditional
encryption schemes are not suitable for protecting the private
information extracted by the JSCC encoder. These schemes are
designed for discrete inputs and are not easily integrated with
JSCC neural networks, which generate continuous outputs.
Thus, the encryption schemes hinder gradient backpropagation
and fail to achieve the ideal optimal solution. Therefore, we
need to design a new form of disentangled IB objective as well
as a privacy-protective algorithm that can be jointly optimized
with the JSCC neural networks so as to achieve a balance
between privacy protection and reconstruction quality.

B. Contributions
The main contribution of this paper is a DIB-PPJSCC
scheme for image transmission. The major contributions of
the paper can be summarized as follows:
We design a new form of DIB objective for privacyprotective JSCC that aims at maximizing the mutual
information between the private subcodewords and the
private information, minimizing the reconstruction distortion as well as minimizing the mutual information
between the private and the public subcodewords. Thus,
the new DIB objective enables privacy-protective JSCC
to disentangle private and public information into private
and public subcodewords which are independent of each
other. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is
the first work that introduces the IB principle to design
privacy-protective JSCC for image transmission.
• The mutual information used in the DIB objective is
intractable for DNNs with high-dimensional representations. Therefore, we develop a new mathematically
tractable and differentiable estimation of mutual information via variational approximations and density ratio trick
by involving a discriminator and a classifier to estimate
posterior probability. These derived estimations are used
as the loss function of DIB-PPJSCC.
• We propose a privacy-protective algorithm, which can be
optimized with the JSCC neural networks jointly in order
to protect the private subcodewords during transmission
and recover private information at the legitimate receiver.
Specifically, we apply a private information encryptor and
decryptor to achieve a password-based protection process.
To jointly optimize the encryptor, decryptor and JSCC
decoder, we derive a novel loss function based on the
maximum entropy principle, which aims at maximizing
the randomness of the eavesdropping as well as improving the reconstruction quality.
•

We compare DIB-PPJSCC with state-of-the-art privacyprotective JSCC methods and the traditional separate scheme.

3

the decoder neural network parameters θ B , and the decoding
process is expressed as DθB : RM → RN . The reconstructed
image x̂ is
x̂ = DθB (ŷ B ) = DθB (ηAB (Eφ (x))) .

(4)

Meanwhile, Eve estimates the private information s contained in x from the received codeword ŷ E using its own
S
neural network with parameter θE , DθE : RM → {0, 1} .
S
The estimated private information ŝ ∈ {0, 1} at Eve is
Fig. 1. An illustration of the privacy-protective JSCC system with wiretap
channel.

Simulation results show that compared with baselines, DIBPPJSCC significantly reduces the reconstruction error, the
eavesdropping accuracy on private information as well as the
complexity.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, the system model is described. The DIB objective for
privacy-protective JSCC and its optimization are presented
in Section III. The privacy-protective algorithm is introduced
in Section IV. Extensive experimental results to verify the
effectiveness of DIB-PPJSCC are provided in Section V.
Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section VI.

(5)

The goal of the considered system is to determine the
encoder and decoder parameters φ and θ B that minimize
the average reconstruction error between x and x̂ (distortion)
while keeping the estimated private information ŝ at Eve
different from the private information s in raw image (privacy).
III. D ISTENGLED IB GUIDED JSCC
This section first introduces the proposed DIB objective for
the image transmission privacy-protective JSCC system. To
obtain a tractable and differentiable form of DIB objective,
we then derive the estimations on mutual information terms
used in DIB objective.
A. DIB objective

II. S YSTEM M ODEL
As shown in Fig. 1, we consider a communication scenario
where a sender Alice transmits an image x ∈ RN with size
N = H (Height) × W (Width) × C (Channel) to a legitimate
receiver Bob, where R represents the set of real numbers. The
image x contains a certain class of private information, which
S
is encoded into one-hot vector s ∈ {0, 1} , where S represents
the number of classes of the private information. Alice encodes
the image x into a codeword y ∈ RM , where M represents
the length of the codeword y to be transmitted. The encoding
function Eφ : RN → RM is parameterized by an encoder
neural network with parameters φ, and the encoding process
can be expressed as:
y = Eφ (x) ,

ŝ = DθE (ŷ E ) = DθE (ηAE (Eφ (x))) .

(1)

The codeword y is transmitted across a noisy channel ηAB :
RM → RM . We consider the widely used Additive White
Gaussian Noise (AWGN) wiretap channel model. The channel
output noisy codeword ŷ B ∈ RM received by Bob is
ŷ B = ηAB (y) = y + z B ,
(2)

2
where z B ∼ N 0, σB
I represents the additive white Gaussian noise at Bob. At the same time, an external eavesdropper
Eve has access to the codeword y via an eavesdropping channel ηAE : RM → RM . The channel output noisy codeword
ŷ E ∈ RM received by Eve is
ŷ E = ηAE (y) = y + z E ,
(3)

2
where z E ∼ N 0, σE
I represents the additive white Gaussian noise at Eve.
Bob decodes the noisy codeword ŷ B into reconstructed
image x̂ ∈ RN . The decoding function is parameterized by

The considered JSCC system is shown in Fig. 2, and it
mainly consists of an encoder block Eφ (·) at Alice, a decoder
block DθB (·) at Bob, two decoder blocks DθE (·) and D̄θ̄E at
Eve, two channel blocks ηAB (·) and ηAE (·), and a privacyprotective algorithm block between Alice and Bob.
In the considered system, DIB principle is adopted to guide
JSCC to disentangle the codeword y into the public subcodeword and the private subcodeword which are independent with
each other. Therefore, we divide the encoder block Eφ (·)
into two components, the public encoder with parameters φt ,
fφt : RN → RMt and the private encoder with parameters
φs , fφs : RN → RMs , where Mt and Ms are the length of
public subcodewords and private subcodewords, respectively.
Denote the public subcodeword as y t ∈ RMt and the private
subcodewords as y s ∈ RMs . We have M = Mt + Ms
and y = concat [y t , y s ], where concat [·] represents the
concatenation along the last axis. Then, the proposed DIB
objective for separating y t and y s as well as minimize the
reconstruction error is
min Ep(x,s) (d (x; x̂)) + αI (y t ; y s ) − βI (y s ; s) , (6)

φs ,φt ,θ B

where α and β are hyperparameters, d (·) is the mean squared
error (MSE) distortion of image transmission, I (y t ; y s ) is
the mutual information between y t and y s , and I (y s ; s) is
the mutual information between y s and s. The first term in
(6) is used to minimize the image transmission error when
separating y t and y s . The second term is used to compress
the information between y s and y t thus encouraging the
independence between y s and y t . The third term is used
to preserve the information related to s in y s . By jointly
minimizing I (y t ; y s ) and maximizing I (y s ; s), the private

4

Fig. 2. An illustration of our proposed DIB-PPJSCC. Orange: the disentangled encoder Eφ and the encryptor Tϕ at Alice. Green: the decryptor T−1
ϕ and
the decoder DθB at Bob. Blue: the classifiers DθE and D̄θ̄E at Eve. First, we train Eφ by optimizing the DIB objective. Then, we fix Eφ and train Tϕ ,
T−1
ϕ and DθB to defense against the eavesdropping of DθE and D̄θ̄E according to the PP algorithm.

information in y t is removed, and the public information
is stored only in y t . This ensures that y t that contains no
private information, can be directly transmitted through the
channel. The subsequent privacy-protective algorithm only
needs to protect y s instead of the entire information. Since (6)
compresses the private information in y t as well as reducing
the reconstruction distortion, we refer (6) as DIB objective.
However, (6) still cannot be applied to the privacy-protective
JSCC systems, since the mutual information terms I (y t ; y s )
and I (y s ; s) in (6) are mathematically intractable due to the
unknown p (y t , y s ), p (y s ) and p (y t ). To circumvent this
challenge, we next derive the variational lower bound on
I (y s ; s) and estimation of I (y t ; y s ).
B. Variational lower bound on I (y s ; s)
Instead of maximizing the intractable true value of I (y s ; s),
we maximize its lower bound since the marginal and joint
distributions of y s and s are unknown. According to the
definition of mutual information and entropy, we have [25]
I (y s ; s) = H (s) − H (s|y s ) ≥ −H (s|y s )


p (s|y s )
= Ep(ys ,s) (log q (s|y s )) + Ep(ys ,s) log
q (s|y s )
|
{z
}
DKL [p(s|y s )||q(s|y s )|]≥0

≥ Ep(ys ,s) (log q (s|y s )) ,

(7)
where H(s) is the entropy of s, H(s|y s ) is the conditional
entropy of s given y s , q (s|y s ) is the variational approximation
of the true posterior p (s|y s ). The equivalence in the first row
of (7) is in the sense of optimization,
ignoring the constant

p(s|y s )
term H (s). Ep(ys ,s) log q(s|y ) in the second row of (7) is
s
the KL divergence between q (s|y s ) and p (s|y s ) and is larger
than 0. Therefore, we have the third row of (7). We use a
S
classifier Cγ : RM → {0, 1} consists of neural network with
parameters γ to express q (s|y s ). To make q (s|y s ) close to
p (s|y s ), we optimize γ to minimize the cross entropy between

Cγ (y s ) and p (s|y s ) so as to reduce the approximation error.
The trained Cγ (y s ) is denoted as q (s|y s ). Since there exists
a Markov chain s ↔ x ↔ y s , p (y s , s) = p (x, s) p (y s |x).
The lower bound of I (y s ; s) is estimated as
I (y s ; s) ≥ Ep(x,s) Ep(ys |x) [log Cγ (y s )] .

(8)

As we use a deterministic fφs , p (y s |x) can be regarded as a
Dirac-delta function, i.e.,
(
1 if y s = fφs (x)
p (y s |x) =
.
(9)
0 else
Replacing p (y s |x) in (8) with (9), we can calculate the
variational lower bound on I (y s ; s) as

I (y s ; s) ≥ Ep(x,s) log Cγ fφs (x) .
(10)
Then, we can use the variational lower bound in (10) as the
loss function to optimize φs .
C. Estimation of I (y t ; y s )
By maximizing the variational lower bound on I (y s ; s),
the private information can be converged in y s . It is
also crucial to minimize I (y t ; y s ) to enforce independence between y s and y t and prevent any private information from leaking into y t . However, minimizing
I (y t ; y s ) = DKL [p (y t , y s ) ||p (y t ) p (y s )] is intractable
since both p (y t , y s ) and p (y t ) p (y s ) involve mixtures with
a large number of components and are intractable. Therefore,
instead of the true value of I (y t ; y s ), we estimate I (y t ; y s )
and minimize the estimation.
We first sample several y. Denote τ (y t , y s ) as the probability that y t is interdependent with y s . We have
(
0 if p (y t , y s ) = p (y t ) p (y s )
τ (y t , y s ) =
.
(11)
1 else

5

If y t and y s are sampled from p (y t ) p (y s ), τ (y t , y s ) = 0. If
y t and y s are sampled from p (y t , y s ), τ (y t , y s ) = 1. Then,
I (y t ; y s ) can be changed into [26]–[28]


p (y t , y s )
I (y t ; y s ) = Ep(yt ,ys ) log
p (y t ) p (y s )


(12)
p (τ (y t , y s ) = 1)
= Ep(yt ,ys ) log
.
p (τ (y t , y s ) = 0)
According to (11), p (τ (y t , y s ) = 1)+p (τ (y t , y s ) = 0) = 1.
(12) can be changed into


p (τ (y t , y s ) = 1)
. (13)
I (y t ; y s ) = Ep(yt ,ys ) log
1 − p (τ (y t , y s ) = 1)
From (13), the estimation of I (y t ; y s ) requires only the
probability p (τ (y t , y s ) = 1). However, directly estimating
p (τ (y t , y s ) = 1) using Monte Carlo does not work due to
high dimensions of y t and y s [26]. Hence, we employ the
density-ratio trick [29] that involves a discriminator to approximate p (τ (y t , y s ) = 1). Suppose we have a discriminator
Disε : RM → [0, 1]2 consists of neural network with parameters ε. The output of the discriminator Disε (y t , y s ) is treated
as p (τ (y t , y s ) = 1). We obtains samples from p (y t , y s ) by
first choosing x uniformly at random and then sampling from
p (y t |x) and p (y s |x). We can also sample from p (y t ) p (y s )
by first sampling from p (y t , y s ) and then permuting y t and
y s along the batch axis. Having access to samples from both
τ (y t , y s ) = 1 and τ (y t , y s ) = 0, we train the discriminator
Disε to distinguish samples from p (y t , y s ) and p (y t ) p (y s ).
The loss function of the discriminator is
min log Disε (y t , y s ) + log (1 − Disε (ỹ t , ỹ s )) ,
ε

(14)

where ỹ t and ỹ s are the results by randomly permuting y t
and y s along the batch axis, respectively. By optimizing (14),
the output of Disε will be forced to approach 0 when y t
and y s are independent and approach 1 when y t and y s are
dependent. Once the discriminator is properly trained, (13) can
be expressed as


Disε (y t , y s )
I (y t ; y s ) ≈ Ep(yt ,ys ) log
.
(15)
1 − Disε (y t , y s )
Overall, by replacing I (y s ; s) and I (y t ; y s ) in (6) with
(10) and (15), respectively, we can calculate the DIB objective
for image transmission privacy-protective JSCC. However, we
experimentally observe that when simultaneously training fφs
and fφt , the neural networks will converge to a degenerated
solution, where all information is encoded in y s , whereas
y t holds almost no information. To prevent this undesirable
solution, we adopt a two-step training strategy [30]. In the first
step, fφs and the classifier Cγ are jointly trained using (10) as
loss function to extract y s that contains private information.
In the second step, fφs is fixed. fφt and DθB are jointly
trained using (15) as loss function, followed by alternating
training with Disε using (14) as loss function in order to
enable y t to capture public information. By training fφs in
the first step, and fixing the values of its parameters in the
second step, fφs has a limited capacity since it ignores most
of the public information and thus enabling fφt to extract

Algorithm 1 Disentangled IB guided JSCC
Input: Dataset (X ); SNR of ηAB (·) SNRAB ; Hyperparamdisten
eters α and β; Maximum Disentangled Epochs Emax
;
cls
Maximum Classification Epochs Emax ;.
Output: Learned DθB , DθB , fφs , fφt , Disε and Cγ .
(0)
1: Initialize fφs and Cγ : φs , γ ← φs , γ (0) .
cls
2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , Emax do
3:
Sample B samples fromP
Dataset: (x, s) ∼ p (x, s);
4:
Calculate LC (φs , γ) = log Cγ fφs (x) ;
x

5:
Update φs , γ ← arg min LC (φs , γ);
6: end for
(0)
(0)
7: Initialize fφt , Dθ B and Disε : φt , θ B , ε ← φt , θ B , ε(0) .
disten
8: for t = 1, 2, . . . , Emax
do
P
9:
Calculate LB (θ B ) = d (x, x̂p )

LA (φt ) =
10:
11:
12:

x

P
Disε (y t ,y s )
d (x, x̂p ) + α log 1−Dis
ε (y ,y )
x

t

s

Update θ B ← arg min LB (θ B );
Update φt ← arg min LA (φt );
Calculate P
Ldis (ε) = log (Disε (y t , y s ) (1 − Disε (ỹ t , ỹ s )));
x

13:
Update ε ← arg min Ldis (ε);
14: end for

public information. The whole training procedure of the DIB
objective for JSCC is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Even though the public subcodewords y t can be directly
transmitted through the channel, the private subcodewords y s
still needs protection. Directly deleting y s will severely damage the image transmission quality due to the loss of private
information. Therefore, in section V, we further propose a
privacy-protective algorithm that mitigates privacy leakage at
Eve and recovers the private information at Bob.
IV. P RIVACY- PROTECTIVE ALGORITHM
This section first proposes a password-based protection
process that converts the private subcodewords into secure
representations. Then, we introduce the optimization objective
of the privacy-protective algorithm and derive its differentiable
form. Next, we describe the whole training process of DIBPPJSCC that combines the DIB objective and the passwordbased privacy-protective algorithm.

A. Password-based privacy-protective process
The password-based privacy-protective process is shown in
the dashed box on the right side of Fig. 2. Assume Alice and
Bob share a legitimate-user-specific password p ∈ ZLen , 0 <
p ≤ plevel , where Len is the length of p, and plevel is a positive
integer greater than 0. To protect y s from being eavesdropped
by Eve during transmission, an encryptor consist of fullyconnected (FC) layer, Tϕ : R(Ms +Len) → RMs is applied
after the encoder at Alice to encrypt y s into protected private
subcodeword y s ∈ RMs . The raw private subcodeword y ps is

6

first concatenated with p and then input into Tϕ to obtain the
protected subcodeword y ps :
y ps = Tϕ (concat [y s , p]) ,

(16)

Since y t contains little private information, we do no protection on y t . y t and y ps are directly concatenated to obtain the
protected codeword y p = concat [y t , y ps ] ∈ RM , which is
transmitted by Alice through the channel. The noisy protected
codeword ŷ pB that Bob received is
ŷ pB = ηAB (y p )
= ηAB (concat [y t , y ps ])
h
i
= concat ŷ t,B , ŷ ps,B ,

(17)

ŷ t,B is concatenated with ȳ ps,B to obtain the recovered codeword at Bob ȳ pB ∈ RM

h
i
concat ŷ t,B , ȳ ps,B .
(19)
ȳ pB = T−1
ϕ
According to (4), ȳ pB is then input into the decoder to
reconstruct the input image as
(20)

Meanwhile, the adversarial eavesdropper Eve has access to
the protected codeword y p through the channel between Alice
and Eve. The noisy protected codeword received at Eve ŷ pE is

(21)

where ŷ t,E = ηAE (y t ) ∈ RMt is the noisy public subcodeword received at Eve, and ŷ ps,E = ηAE (y ps ) ∈ RMs is the
noisy protected private subcodeword received at Eve. Eve will
try to estimate s from ŷ pE . The estimation is
ŝpE = DθE (ŷ pE ) .

(0)

(0)

P
Calculate LB (θ B ) = d (x, x̂p ),
x
P
p,p 
LT (ϕ) = d (x, x̂p ) − α1 H (ŝ) − β1 H s̄E 1 ,
x
P
p,p 
LE θ E , θ̄ E =
log DθE (ŷ pE ) D̄θ̄E ȳ E 1 ;
x

7:
Update θ E , θ̄ E ← arg min LE θ E , θ̄ E ;
8:
Update θ B , ϕ ← arg min (LB (θ B ) + LT (ϕ));
9: end for

Denote the codeword
that
h
i Eve uses to estimate s as
p,p
p,p
ȳ E 1 = concat ŷ t,E , ȳ s,E 1 . The private information estimated by Eve in this situation is
p,p
p,p 
(24)
s̄E 1 = D̄θ̄E ȳ E 1 ,
S

where D̄θ̄E : RM → {0, 1} is neural networks with parameters θ̄ E and structure similar to that of DθE (·). The goal of
the password-based privacy-protective process is to minimize
p,p
the amount of private information in ŷ pE and ȳ E 1 while
maximizing the amount of private information in ȳ ps,B . This
ensures that Bob can successfully recover all the necessary
private and public information, while Eve remains incapable
of eavesdropping the private information.
B. Loss function

ŷ pE = ηAE (y p )
= ηAE (concat [y t , y ps ])
h
i
= concat ŷ t,E , ŷ ps,E ,

(0)

θ B , ϕ, θ E , θ̄ E ← θ B , ϕ(0) , θ E , θ̄ E .
2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , Emax do
3:
Sample B samples from Dataset: (x, s) ∼ p (x, s);
4:
Sample B passwords p ∼ U (1, plevel );
5:
Sample B passwords p1 ∼ U (1, plevel ) guessed by Eve;
6:

where ŷ t,B = ηAB (y t ) is the noisy public subcodeword
received at Bob, and ŷ ps,B = ηAB (y ps ) is the noisy protected
private subcodeword received at Bob. At Bob, a decryptor
(Ms +Len)
consists of FC layer, T−1
→ RMs is applied
ϕ : R
to recover the private information. Similarly, ŷ ps,B is first
concatenated with p and then input into T−1
ϕ . The recovered
noisy private subcodeword at Bob, ȳ ps,B ∈ RMs is

h
i
p
ȳ ps,B = T−1
concat
ŷ
,
p
.
(18)
s,B
ϕ

x̂p =DθB (ȳ pB ) .

Algorithm 2 PP-algorithm
Input: Dataset (X ); SNR of ηAB SNRAB ; SNR of ηAE
SNRAE ; Hyperparameters α1 and β1 ; Trained fφs (·) and
fφt (·), Maximum Epochs Emax ; Password level plevel .
Output: Learned DθB , Tϕ , T−1
ϕ , Dθ E and D̄θ̄ E .
−1
1: Initialize Dθ B , Tϕ , Tϕ , Dθ E and D̄θ̄ E :

(22)

In addition, we consider a severe scenario where Eve has
access to the structure and parameters of T−1
ϕ (·) as well as
the structure of password, but has no access to the actual
correct password p. In this situation, Eve randomly guesses
the password p shared by Alice and Bob and tries to recover
the raw private subcodword y s . Assume the password guessed
by Eve is p1 . The recovered noisy private subcodeword at Eve,
p,p
ȳ s,E 1 ∈ RMs is

h
i
p,p
p
ȳ s,E 1 = T−1
concat
ŷ
,
p
.
(23)
1
s,E
ϕ

To guarantee the image transmission quality as well as the
privacy-protection effectiveness, we design an optimization
objective for the aforementioned protection process as
min Ep(x,s) (d (x, x̂p ))
θB

min Ep(x,s) (d (x, x̂p )) + α1 DKL (ŝ||U)
ϕ

p,p
+ β1 DKL s̄E 1 ||U

p,p
max I (ŷ pE , s) + I ȳ E 1 , s

(25)

θ E ,θ̄ E

where α1 and β1 are hyperparameters, U is the uniform
distribution. The optimization objective comprises three terms
associated with different components: the decoder at Bob
DθB , the encryptor Tϕ and the decryptor T−1
ϕ , the private
information estimator DθE and D̄θ̄E at Eve. The first line in
(25) optimizes DθB to minimize the reconstruction distortion
between the raw image x and the reconstructed image x̂p at
Bob. This term enables the enhancement of the reconstruction
quality. The second line in (25) also optimizes Tϕ and
T−1
ϕ to reduce the reconstruction distortion so as to ensure

7

reconstruction quality while protecting private information.
Additionally, this line optimizes Tϕ and T−1
ϕ to minimize the
KL divergence between ŝ and uniform distribution, as well
p,p
as the KL divergence between s̄E 1 and the uniform distrip,p
bution. By doing so, the estimations based on ŷ pE and ȳ E 1
p,p1
p
become more randomized, and ŷ E and ȳ E contain minimal
information about s [20]. According to the definition of KL
p,p
divergence, DKL (ŝ||U) and DKL s̄E 1 ||U are calculated as

 
p (ŝ)
DKL (ŝ||U) = Ep(ŝ) log
p (U)
= log S − H (ŝ)
!!
(26)
p,p 

p s̄E 1
p,p1
DKL s̄E ||U = Ep(s̄p,p1 ) log
E
p (U)
p,p1 
= log S − H s̄E
.
Since S is a fixed constant that cannot
 be optimized, minimizp,p
ing DKL (ŝ||U) and DKL s̄E 1 ||U is equal to maximizing
p,p
the entropy of ŝ and s̄E 1 , thus increasing the uncertainty of
the private estimations made by Eve. The third line in (25)
p
optimizes D
 θE and D̄θ̄E at Eve to maximizes I (ŷ E , s) and
p,p1
I ȳ E , s . This optimization goal aims to improve Eve’s
eavesdropping accuracy on private information s. When Alice
and Bob engage in alternating training with Eve, they can
obtain stronger privacy protection performance. However, the
mutual information used in (25) cannot
be calculated due to
p,p 
the unknown p (ŷ pE ) and p ȳ E 1 . We use DθE and D̄θ̄E to
p,p
estimate I (ŷ pE ,s) and I ȳ E 1, s . Let q (s|ŷ pE ) = DθE (ŷ pE )
p,p1
p,p1
. Similar to (10), we have
= D̄θ̄E ȳ E
and q s|ȳ E
I (ŷ pE , s) ≥ Ep(x,s) (log DθE (ŷ pE ))

p,p 
p,p
I ȳ E 1 , s ≥ Ep(x,s) log D̄θ̄E ȳ E 1 .

(27)

By substituting (26) and (27) into (25), we can derive the
differentiable form of the proposed loss function. The training
procedure of PP algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2.
C. Training Process of DIB-PPJSCC
The architecture of the DIB-PPJSCC system is shown in
Fig. 2. The encoder first extracts the information of the input
image as features according to feature extractors. Then, to
control the length of y t and y s , FC layers are used to turn the
features into vectors y t and y s . At Bob, ŷ B is first passed into
an FC layer and then upsampled to the same dimension as x
to obtain x̂. At the output layer of DθB , an activation function
is used to transform the pixel values in x̂ to [0, 1]. We then
multiply x̂ by 255 and round the resulting values to ensure that
the pixel values are discrete and fall between [0, 255]. At Eve,
ŷ E is directly input into DθE and D̄θ̄E . The softmax layer [31]
is applied to calculate the estimated probabilities at the output
layers of DθE and D̄θ̄E . The whole training process of DIBPPJSCC consists of two stages. In the first stage, the encoder
Eφ and the classifier Cγ are trained to disentangle y t and y s
following Algorithm 1. In particular, fφs and Cγ are jointly
trained to improve the classification accuracy of y s for Vd1
epochs, and then fφt is trained to extract y t for Vd2 epochs.
In the second stage, fφs and fφt are fixed. DθB , Tϕ , T−1
ϕ Dθ E
and D̄θ̄E are jointly trained using (25) as loss function for Vp
epochs to achieve the password-based privacy-protection.

V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we provide extensive experiments to validate
DIB-PPJSCC. We compare the image transmission and privacy
protection performance of DIB-PPJSCC with various baselines
by assessing the reconstruction error and privacy eavesdropping accuracy as key metrics. Furthermore, we employed visualizations of the extracted codewords and recovered images
to illustrate the disentanglement and privacy protection capabilities of DIB-PPJSCC, and the robustness and complexity of
DIB-PPJSCC are also discussed.
A. Experimental settings
1) Datasets: The experiments are carried on two datasets
including the colored MNIST [32] and the UTK Face dataset
[33] to account for different image sizes and colors.
The colored MNIST dataset: The raw MNIST dataset
comprises grayscale images of handwritten digits ranging from
“0” to “9”, consisting of a train set with 60000 samples
and a test set with 10000 samples. We extend it into the
colored MNIST dataset by randomly and uniformly assigning
ten different colors to the handwritten digits. The generated
colored MNIST dataset is RGB, and we set the color of
the handwritten digits as the private information s. The raw
images are normalized to the range of [0, 1] by dividing 255.
The UTK Face dataset: It has a total of 23705 facial
images of individuals from different age groups, ethnicities,
and genders without the specification of the train and test
dataset. We set ethnicity to the private information s. The
dataset provides annotations for five categories of ethnicity:
White, Black, Asian, Indian, and an ”Other” category including individuals from various other ethnic backgrounds. We
randomly select 19000 images for the train set, while the
remaining images are allocated to the test set. The raw images
sized at 200 × 200 × 3, are first cropped into 128 × 128 × 3
and then normalized to the range of [0, 1] by dividing 255.
2) Baselines: We compare DIB-PPJSCC with the following
four baselines to illustrate the advantages of different components of DIB-PPJSCC over existing studies.
A. Deep JSCC [9] + randomly discard: The model
consists of a JSCC encoder and decoder that are jointly trained
to reduce the image transmission error without considering
privacy protection. During testing, part of the codewords
extracted by the JSCC encoder is randomly discarded, while
the remaining codewords are transmitted.
B. DIB-JSCC + private codewords discard: The JSCC
encoder and decoder in this method are trained to reduce
the DIB objective following Algorithm 1. After training, the
extracted codewords consist of private codewords and public
codewords. During testing, this model only transmits the
public codewords and does not transmit the private codewords.
C. Adversarial JSCC [17], [18]: This model is composed
of a JSCC encoder followed by a JSCC decoder at Bob
for image reconstruction and a classifier at Eve for private
information classification. The JSCC encoder and decoder
are jointly trained to reduce the reconstruction error as well
as increase the uncertainty of privacy classification at Eve.

8

TABLE I
E AVESDROPPING ACCURACY UNDER DIFFERENT SNRAE .

-15dB

-10dB

Acc under different SNRAE
-5dB
0dB
5dB
10dB

15dB

Deep JSCC + randomly discard
DIB-JSCC + private codewords discard
Adversarial JSCC
DIB-PPJSCC

0.125
0.0781
0.125
0.0938

0.1797
0.1328
0.1328
0.1171

0.2656
0.1093
0.1849
0.1249

0.4141
0.125
0.2969
0.1302

0.4297
0.1172
0.3125
0.1406

0.5313
0.1172
0.3672
0.1823

0.5703
0.1406
0.3647
0.1953

Deep JSCC + randomly discard
DIB-JSCC + private codewords discard
Adversarial JSCC
DIB-PPJSCC

0.2968
0.2344
0.2344
0.2188

0.3593
0.2657
0.3438
0.25

0.4063
0.375
0.3906
0.3281

0.5469
0.3906
0.4063
0.375

0.5938
0.4063
0.4063
0.375

0.6093
0.4375
0.4375
0.3906

0.6094
0.4375
0.4844
0.4063

Datasets

Methods

Colored MNIST

UTK face

Fig. 3. Visual comparison between baselines and DIB-PPJSCC on the colored
MNIST dataset.

Fig. 4. Visual comparison between separate scheme and the proposed schemes
on the UTK face dataset.

Meanwhile, a classifier at Eve is trained to improve the
eavesdropping accuracy on the private information.
D. Separate scheme: This baseline employs separate source
coding, encryption, and channel coding followed by modulation. We choose the better portable graphics (BPG) [34] for
source coding, the advanced encryption standard (AES) [35]
with block and key size of 128 bits for encryption, the lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) [36] codes with 12 rate for channel coding, and the 4-ary quadrature amplitude modulation
(QAM) for modulation.

3) Implementation details: To make a fair comparison, the
settings and structure of neural networks used in DIB-PPJSCC
are the same as those used in baselines. We choose α1 and
β1 from the set {0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5} × 105 , plevel from the set
{4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128} that provide the best performance. Vd1 ,
Vd2 and Vp are set to be 30, 50 and 50, respectively.
For the colored MNIST dataset, the private encoder is
composed of 3 FC layers with dimensions 2352 → 512 →
128 → Ms , while the public encoder consists of 3 FC
layers with dimensions 2352 → 512 → 128 → Mt . The
decoder is constructed with three FC layers of dimensions
M → 256 → 512 → 2352. The optimizers of encoders
and the decoder are Adam optimizers with a learning rate
of 0.001 and betas of (0.9, 0.999). For the UTK face dataset,
the private encoder consists of a convolutional neural network
(CNN) with 5 convolutional layers, followed by an FC layer
with dimensions of 512 × 8 × 8 → Ms . The public encoder
consists of a CNN with 5 convolutional layers followed by an
FC layer with dimensions of 512 × 8 × 8 → Mt . The decoder
is constructed with an FC layer of dimension M → 512×8×8
followed by 5 transposed convolutional layers. The optimizers
of encoders and the decoder are Adam optimizers with a
learning rate of 0.0002 and betas of (0.5, 0.999).
For baseline A and C, the JSCC encoder and decoder are
jointly trained for Vd2 epochs. For baseline B, the JSCC
encoder and decoder are trained similarly to DIB-PPJSCC
following Algorithm 1, and then y s is fixed to 0, and DθB is
trained to reduce the reconstruction distortion for 50 epochs.
Classifiers consisting of 2 FC layers with dimensions M →
16 → S are trained for 5 epochs to detect the private information from codewords extracted by the encoder. For baseline D,
the MLP classifier is trained using the QAM codewords. The
accuracy of these classifiers in classifying private information
serves as a metric of defense against eavesdroppers.
B. Performance comparsion
Table I shows the private information classification accuracy, i.e., the eavesdropping accuracy of baselines A, B, C
and DIB-PPJSCC under various SNRAE . plevel is fixed to
128, and Len used for the colored MNIST and the UTK
face datasets are 16 and 10, respectively. The reconstruction
MSE of all methods is kept close on both datasets, except
for baseline B on the colored MNIST dataset. The MSE of

9

(a) t-SNE on y t with respect to color. (b) t-SNE on y t with respect to dig- (c) t-SNE on y s with respect to color. (d) t-SNE on y s with respect to digits.
its.
Fig. 5. t-SNE visualization of public subcodewords y t and private subcodewords y s extracted by DIB-PPJSCC for test set of the colored MNIST dataset.
The neural network is trained when SNRAB = 30dB. Each color represents a different class.

(a) t-SNE of y s when SNRAE = 5dB.

(b) t-SNE of y p
s when SNRAE = 5dB.

(c) t-SNE of y p
s when SNRAE = 15dB.

Fig. 6. t-SNE visualization of the private subcodeword y s and the protected private subcodeword y p
s extracted by DIB-PPJSCC for test set of the UTK
dataset. The neural network is trained when SNRAB = 30dB, SNRAE = 5dB, 15dB. Each color represents a different class of race.

baseline B is approximately 0.01 larger than other methods
on the colored MNIST dataset due to the failure of baseline
B in achieving a lower MSE. From Table I, we can observe
that the eavesdropping accuracy of DIB-PPJSCC is lower than
all other methods on the UTK face dataset. On the colored
MNIST dataset, the eavesdropping accuracy of DIB-PPJSCC
is lower than baseline A and C and close to baseline B with
a smaller MSE. These observations validate the effectiveness
of DIB-PPJSCC. From Table I, we can also observe that the
eavesdropping accuracy of baseline B on the colored MNIST
dataset is close to random guess (about 0.1 for 10 categories)
and exhibits minimal variation when SNRAE increases. This
is because the color information can be completely separated
from other information, and the public codewords on the
colored MNIST dataset in baseline B contain no information
about color, thus leading to eavesdropping accuracy close to
that of a random guess.
Figure 3 shows the visual reconstructions of baselines A,
B, C and DIB-PPJSCC on the colored MNIST dataset when
SNRAB = 30dB and SNRAE = 5dB. From Fig. 3, we can observe that the reconstruction error and the visual performance
of DIB-PPJSCC are both superior to all other baselines. For
example, in the third column of the fifth row of Fig. 3, the
color can be clearly identified as yellow, while in the third
column of other rows, the color may be identified as green or

white. Hence, DIB-PPJSCC can protect private information
and recover images more precisely. From Fig. 3, we can
also observe that the reconstruction error of baseline B is
much larger than those of other methods even though baseline
B has the lowest eavesdropping accuracy. This is because
baseline B discards all color-relevant information in private
codewords, and the color of all recovered images is similar,
shown as in the third row of Fig. 3. We can also observe
that although losing color-relevant information, baseline B
can keep consistent with the raw image in other information
such as the value of handwritten digits. For example, in the
second column of the third row of Fig. 3, we can identify
the digit as 7 although the color is different from that in the
corresponding raw image. This makes baseline B valuable
when the security requirements are strict since baseline B
is able to thoroughly discard the private information without
losing public information in the recovered images.
Figure 4 shows the visual reconstructions of baselines D, C
and DIB-PPJSCC on the UTK face dataset when SNRAB =
30dB and SNRAE = 5dB. Since we choose the password
Len
uniformly from [1, . . . , plevel ] , the information amount of
the password used by DIB-PPJSCC is
Hp = Len × logp2level (bits) .

(28)

plevel and Len are set to be 256 and 16 to keep the consistency

10

TABLE II
E AVESDROPPING ACCURACY UNDER DIFFERENT SNRAB AND SNRAE .
Datasets

-15dB

Acc under different test SNRAE
-10dB
-5dB
0dB
5dB
10dB

15dB

-15dB
5dB
15dB

0.125
0.1406
0.125

0.2109
0.2344
0.1484

0.2578
0.2422
0.2031

0.3828
0.3125
0.2813

0.5313
0.3125
0.3281

0.5938
0.375
0.3203

0.6797
0.4922
0.3647

DIB-PPJSCC

-15dB
5dB
15dB

0.0938
0.1172
0.1172

0.1485
0.125
0.1016

0.1485
0.1641
0.1328

0.1641
0.1563
0.1328

0.2656
0.1328
0.1406

0.3906
0.3203
0.1875

0.5938
0.4688
0.1953

Adversarial JSCC

-15dB
5dB
15dB

0.2344
0.3438
0.3906

0.4375
0.4375
0.4531

0.4688
0.4375
0.4531

0.5
0.5469
0.5

0.4844
0.4063
0.5

0.5
0.4844
0.6094

0.6094
0.4844
0.4844

DIB-PPJSCC

-15dB
5dB
15dB

0.2188
0.2967
0.3218

0.3437
0.2813
0.3594

0.3593
0.3438
0.4219

0.4688
0.4531
0.4688

0.4531
0.375
0.3906

0.5
0.4375
0.4844

0.5312
0.4844
0.4063

Methods

Train SNRAE

Adversarial JSCC
Colored MNIST

UTK face

between the passwords used by baseline D and DIB-PPJSCC
(both 128 bits). According to Shannon’s separation theorem
[1], the necessary and sufficient condition for reliable communication over a channel with capacity C is that the transmitted
rate R is smaller than its upper bound Rmax , i.e.,
R ≤ Rmax =

M
C.
N

(29)

(1+SNR)

For AWGN channel, there is C = log2
. Then, we calculate the maximum achievable rate, Rmax as the compression
level utilized by the BPG encoder. The eavesdropping accuracy
of the baseline D is around 0.35 under different SNRAE due
to the randomness in the QAM codewords generated through
AES encryption scheme. The eavesdropping accuracy of DIBPPJSCC ranges from 0.2166 to 0.4219 and is higher than that
of the separate scheme only when SNRAE = 10, 15dB. From
Fig. 4, we can observe that even though the reconstruction
MSE of baseline D is slightly lower than baseline C and
DIB-PPJSCC, the key facial information such as eye and nose
positions is damaged severely. This is because the BPG breaks
down the adjacent pixels of the raw image into multiple blocks
for compression without considering the semantic relationship
between pixels, thus potentially damaging the key information.
In addition, even though the eavesdropping accuracy of DIBPPJSCC is slightly higher than that of baseline D when
SNRAE = 10dB, 15dB, baseline D exhibits the cliff effect
when SNRAB decreases due to the thresholding effects of the
channel code [9]. Consequently, the recovered images cannot
be opened due to damage to the BPG header. Hence, the DIBPPJSCC has better reconstruction and robustness performance
than the separate scheme.
C. Qualitative analysis
Figure 5 shows the 2-dimensional projections of the public
subcodewords y t and private subcodewords y s extracted by
DIB-PPJSCC for test set of the colored MNIST dataset.
In particular, we utilize t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t-SNE) [37] to project the codewords into a 2dimensional space. We also show the labels of each image

with regard to the private information, i.e., color, and the
public information, i.e., digits, to make it easier to investigate
the clusters. From Fig. 5(a) and 5(b), we can observe that
the t-SNE projections of y t with different colors exhibit
significant overlap, while the t-SNE projections of y t with
different digits are separated well. This indicates that y t
contains abundant digit-related information and is agnostic to
the private information. From Fig. 5(c) and 5(d), we can also
observe that the t-SNE projections of y s shows distributions
totally different to those of y t . The t-SNE projections of y s
with different colors are distinctly separated, while the t-SNE
projections of y s with different digits are mixed together. This
suggests that y s contains abundant color-related information
while almost no digit-related information. This is because
the DIB algorithm shown in Algorithm 1 preserves as much
private information, i.e., the information related to the color in
y s as possible, and removes the private information in y t at the
same time. In addition, to guarantee the reconstruction quality,
the DIB algorithm preserves the public information, i.e., the
information related to the digit, that will not cause privacy
leakage in y t instead of y s , as y t is directly transmitted to
the legitimate receiver Bob while y s is altered to be protected
using Algorithm 2. Hence, the DIB algorithm is able to
effectively disentangle the private and public information and
preserve them in the proper codewords to achieve privacy
protection.
Figure 6 shows the 2-dimensional t-SNE projections of the
private subcodewords y s and the protected private subcodewords y ps extracted by DIB-PPJSCC for test set of the UTK
face dataset. The labels of the private information, i.e., race
are also shown to investigate the clusters. From Fig. 6(a), we
can observe that the t-SNE projections of y s are clustered
based on the class of race, which indicates that y s contains
abundant race-related information by applying DIB algorithm.
From Fig. 6(b) and Fig. 6(c), we can observe that the distance
between the t-SNE projections of y ps with different races are
smaller than those of y s . This is because the PP algorithm
reduces the mutual information between y ps and the label of
race. Consequently, y ps contains less race-related information

11

0.8

0.6
1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0
8

16

32

64

128

0.2

0.2

0

0
8 16

32

64

128

8 16

32

(a) Len = 4

64

128

(b) Len = 8

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
8 16

32

64

128

(c) Len = 12

8 16

32

64

128

(d) Len = 16

Fig. 7. The eavesdropping accuracy on the colored MNIST dataset under various Len and plevel . The neural networks are trained when SNRAB =
30dB, SNRAE = −15dB, 5dB, 15dB. The solid lines, the dashed lines and the dotted lines represent the eavesdropping accuracy of ŷ t,E (expressed as
p,p
w/o p1 ), ȳ E 1 (expressed as w/ p1 ) and ŷ E (expressed as ŷ E ), respectively.

than y s , and the difference between y ps with different races are
also reduced. Moreover, we can also observe that compared
with Fig. 6(a), some of the t-SNE projections of y ps are totally
mixed together in Fig. 6(b) (the left cluster) and Fig. 6(c) (the
bottom cluster) regardless of races. This is because the PP
algorithm reduces the KL divergence between the uniform
distribution and y ps , and thus increases the randomness of
y ps . The left cluster of Fig. 6(b) and the bottom cluster of
Fig. 6(c) represent y ps that are randomly distributed with
respect to the race after the application of the PP algorithm.
These y ps with different races are projected to the same space,
which demonstrates the effectiveness of the PP algorithm.
Therefore, the PP algorithm can reduce privacy leakage as well
as increase the randomness of the codewords to be transmitted
through the channel.

D. Robustness and complexity
Table II shows the eavesdropping accuracy of DIB-PPJSCC
and baseline C on the colored MNIST dataset that is trained
when SNRAB = 30dB, SNRAE = −15dB, 5dB, 15dB and
tested under different SNRAE . From Table II, we can observe that the eavesdropping accuracy of DIB-PPJSCC is
always lower than that of baseline C. This implies that DIBPPJSCC has better robustness than baseline C when there
is an estimated error on SNRAE . From Table II, we can
also observe that increasing the train SNRAE can reduce the
privacy leakage caused by the mismatching between train and
test SNRAE . For instance, when the test SNRAE = 15dB, the
eavesdropping accuracy when the train SNRAE = −15dB,
increases up to 0.5938 and 0.5312 for the colored MNIST and
UTK face datasets, respectively. However, the eavesdropping
accuracy is 0.4688 and 0.4844 when the train SNRAE = 5dB,

12

(a) The colored MNIST dataset.

(b) The UTK face dataset.

Fig. 8. The PSNR of the images recovered by DIB-PPJSCC for the test set of the colored MNIST and the UTK face dataset. The neural network is trained
when SNRAB = 30dB, SNRAE = −5dB, 0dB, 5dB, 10dB, 15dB and is tested under various SNRAB .

which is lower than 0.5938 and 0.5312. Moreover, when
the train SNRAE = 15dB and the test SNRAE varies,
the eavesdropping accuracy slightly fluctuates around 0.15
on the colored MNIST dataset, and 0.4 on the UTK face
dataset, which is close to the random guess probability. This
is because when the train SNRAE is larger, the randomness
of y s introduced by the noise becomes weaker. To prevent
privacy leakage, the PP algorithm needs to impose a stronger
security constraint on y s . Hence, the defense capability against
eavesdropping is better than that when the train SNRAE is
smaller. This indicates that DIB-PPJSCC has better robustness
to the change of test SNRAE when the train SNRAE is larger.
Figure 7 shows the eavesdropping accuracy of ŷ E as well as
p,p
the eavesdropping accuracy of ŷ t,E and ȳ s,E 1 on the colored
MNIST dataset under different password lengths Len and
password levels plevel when SNRAB = 30dB and SNRAE =
−15, 5, 15dB. From Fig. 7, we can observe that when Len
and plevel become larger, the eavesdropping accuracy becomes
smaller. This is because the larger the Len and plevel are, the
randomness of y s introduced by the PP algorithm is stronger,
and thus decreasing the eavesdropping accuracy more. Morep,p
over, the eavesdropping accuracy of ȳ s,E 1 which is recovered
by the eavesdropper using the wrong password p1 , is always
close to the eavesdropping accuracy of ŷ t,E under all Len and
plevel . This demonstrates the effectiveness of the PP algorithm
in defending against the strong eavesdropper that has access to
T−1
ϕ . From Fig. 7, we can also observe that the eavesdropping
accuracy will be significantly reduced as long as using the PP
algorithm to protect private information no matter what Len
and plevel are. For instance, when Len = 4, plevel = 8 and
SNRAE = 15dB where the eavesdropper is strong and the
password is poorly random, the eavesdropping accuracy of
DIB-PPJSCC is still lower than that of ŷ E . This implies that
the PP algorithm is robust to Len and plevel , and we can apply
different Len and plevel to achieve various security levels.
Figure 8 shows the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) of
DIB-PPJSCC under various test SNRAB on test sets of the

colored MNIST and the UTK face datasets. PSNR is
!
2
(2n − 1)
PSNR = 10log10
,
mse (x, x̂)

(30)

where n is the number of bits that each image pixel uses,
mse (x, x̂) is MSE between x and x̂. In particular, SNRAB
is fixed as 30dB when training. The neural networks are
trained with identical hyperparameters under various SNRAE
and tested under various SNRAB . From Fig. 8, we can
observe that the PSNR decreases when the train SNRAE
increases under all test SNRAB . This is because an increase
in the train SNRAE means stronger eavesdroppers. In order
to defend against eavesdropping, the codewords extracted by
DIB-PPJSCC will pay more attention to privacy protection,
thus reducing the reconstruction quality. From Fig. 8, we can
also observe that when the test SNRAB drops below the train
SNRAB , the performance does not saturate immediately, and
the reconstruction quality exhibits a graceful degradation. This
is because DIB-PPJSCC uses the channel conditions in the loss
function and enables the learned codewords to resist channel
interference. Hence, the codewords extracted by DIB-PPJSCC
are robust to different test SNRAB .
We also test the time and calculate the computational
complexity of baselines and DIB-PPJSCC. The average run
time achieved by DIB-PPJSCC on the CPU is 300ms per
image. The neural networks used by DIB-PPJSCC consist of
convolutions/deconvolutions and FC layers. The computational
cost of a single convolutional layer is H×W ×K×K×Ci ×Co ,
where K is the filter size, Co is the number of output channels,
Ci is the number of input channels and H × W is the size
of the feature map. The computational cost of an FC layer
is (2I − 1) O, where I is the input vector dimension and O
is the output vector dimension. Only the width and height of
the feature map and the vector dimension depend on the image
dimensions, and all other factors are constant and independent
of the image size. Consequently, the computational complexity
of DIB-PPJSCC is linear with respect to the pixel count of
the input image. Regarding the DL-based baselines (A, B and
C), the time and computational complexity are similar since

13

the neural networks used by these baselines are similar to
those used by DIB-PPJSCC. For the separate scheme, the
encoding and decoding time is 337ms per image, which is
larger than DIB-PPJSCC due to the iterative channel decoding
process required by LDPC to achieve optimal error correction
capabilities. Furthermore, it is worth noting that the separate
schemes will need more time for optimal iterative channel
decoding when SNRAB becomes smaller [38], [39]. The
above results prove that DIB-PPJSCC is competitive with
the baselines not only in terms of reconstruction quality and
privacy protection but also in terms of complexity.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed a DIB-PPJSCC scheme
for privacy-protective image transmission, which can protect
private information as well as recover it at the legitimate receiver. Specifically, we first derived a mathematically tractable
form of the IB objective for disentangling private information and public information. Then, to appropriately protect
private information, we further proposed a password-based
privacy-protective algorithm that can prevent privacy leakage
and guarantee privacy recovery simultaneously. Experimental
results have shown that DIB-PPJSCC always achieved a better
balance between privacy protection and reconstruction quality
than other baselines, which demonstrates the effectiveness of
the DIB objective and the password-based privacy-protective
algorithm. In addition, the images recovered by DIB-PPJSCC
had better visual performance and preserved more critical
information than other baselines. The eavesdropping accuracy
of DIB-PPJSCC gradually decreases when the level and length
of the passwords increase, which implies that the PP algorithm
is robust and is able to provide different levels of privacy
protection. When the channel SNR falls, DIB-PPJSCC is
shown to provide a graceful degradation of the reconstruction
quality. The overall results showed that the proposed schemes
can significantly reduce privacy leakage and improve the
reconstruction quality.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst.
Techn. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, Jul. 1948.
[2] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. Van Tilborg, “On the inherent
intractability of certain coding problems (corresp.),” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, May 1978.
[3] M. Chafii, L. Bariah, S. Muhaidat, and M. Debbah, “Ten scientific challenges for 6G: Rethinking the foundations of communications theory,”
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/physics/2207.01843, 2022.
[4] M. Chen, D. Gündüz, K. Huang, W. Saad, M. Bennis, A. V. Feljan, and
H. V. Poor, “Distributed learning in wireless networks: Recent progress
and future challenges,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 12,
pp. 3579–3605, Oct. 2021.
[5] G. Cheung and A. Zakhor, “Bit allocation for joint source/channel
coding of scalable video,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 340–356, Mar. 2000.
[6] S. Heinen and P. Vary, “Transactions papers source-optimized channel coding for digital transmission channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 592–600, Apr. 2005.
[7] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication.
Springer, 1968, vol. 2.
[8] M. Gastpar, B. Rimoldi, and M. Vetterli, “To code, or not to code: Lossy
source-channel communication revisited,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1147–1158, May 2003.

[9] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. B. Kurka, and D. Gündüz, “Deep joint sourcechannel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cogn.
Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, Sept. 2019.
[10] K. Choi, K. Tatwawadi, A. Grover, T. Weissman, and S. Ermon, “Neural
joint source-channel coding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. and Learn., Long
Beach, California, USA, Jun. 2019, pp. 1182–1192.
[11] L. Sun, Y. Yang, M. Chen, C. Guo, W. Saad, and H. V. Poor, “Adaptive
information bottleneck guided joint source and channel coding for image
transmission,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 2628–
2644, Aug. 2023.
[12] J. Xu, B. Ai, W. Chen, A. Yang, P. Sun, and M. Rodrigues, “Wireless
image transmission using deep source channel coding with attention
modules,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., Apr. 2021.
[13] Y. Song, M. Xu, L. Yu, H. Zhou, S. Shao, and Y. Yu, “Infomax neural
joint source-channel coding via adversarial bit flip,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artificial Intell., New York, USA, Feb. 2020, pp. 5834–5841.
[14] J. Xu, B. Ai, W. Chen, N. Wang, and M. Rodrigues, “Deep joint
encryption and source-channel coding: An image visual protection
approach,” Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.03234, 2021.
[15] T.-Y. Tung and D. Gunduz, “Deep joint source-channel and encryption
coding: Secure semantic communication,” Available: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2208.09245, 2022.
[16] A. Massoudi, F. Lefebvre, C. De Vleeschouwer, B. Macq, and J.-J.
Quisquater, “Overview on selective encryption of image and video:
challenges and perspectives,” Eurasip J. Inf. Security, vol. 2008, no. 1,
pp. 1–18, Nov. 2008.
[17] T. Marchioro, N. Laurenti, and D. Gündüz, “Adversarial networks for
secure wireless communications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Acoustics Speech
Signal Process., Virtual, May 2020, pp. 8748–8752.
[18] E. Erdemir, P. L. Dragotti, and D. Gündüz, “Privacy-aware communication over a wiretap channel with generative networks,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Acoustics Speech Signal Process., Shenzhen, China, Oct. 2022,
pp. 2989–2993.
[19] D. B. Kurka and D. Gündüz, “DeepJSCC-f: Deep joint source-channel
coding of images with feedback,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 178–193, May 2020.
[20] P. C. Roy and V. N. Boddeti, “Mitigating information leakage in image
representations: A maximum entropy approach,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., Long Beach, California, USA, June 2019,
pp. 2586–2594.
[21] A. Boulemtafes, A. Derhab, and Y. Challal, “A review of privacypreserving techniques for deep learning,” Neur. Comput., vol. 384, pp.
21–45, Apr. 2020.
[22] M. Bloch, O. Günlü, A. Yener, F. Oggier, H. V. Poor, L. Sankar, and R. F.
Schaefer, “An overview of information-theoretic security and privacy:
Metrics, limits and applications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 5–22, Mar. 2021.
[23] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck
method,” Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0004057, 2000.
[24] Z. Pan, L. Niu, J. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Disentangled information
bottleneck,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intell., Virtual, Feb. 2021,
pp. 9285–9293.
[25] A. A. Alemi, I. Fischer, J. V. Dillon, and K. Murphy, “Deep variational information bottleneck,” Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.
00410, 2016.
[26] H. Kim and A. Mnih, “Disentangling by factorising,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. and Learn., Stockholm, Sweden, Jul. 2018, pp. 2649–2658.
[27] R. T. Q. Chen, X. Li, R. B. Grosse, and D. K. Duvenaud, “Isolating sources of disentanglement in variational autoencoders,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., Montreal, Canada, Dec. 2018, p.
2610–2620.
[28] Z. Chen, Y. Luo, R. Qiu, S. Wang, Z. Huang, J. Li, and Z. Zhang,
“Semantics disentangling for generalized zero-shot learning,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Virtual, Oct. 2021, pp. 8712–8720.
[29] X. Nguyen, M. J. Wainwright, and M. I. Jordan, “Estimating divergence
functionals and the likelihood ratio by convex risk minimization,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5847–5861, Nov. 2010.
[30] N. Hadad, L. Wolf, and M. Shahar, “A two-step disentanglement
method,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., Salt Lake
City, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 772–780.
[31] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, “A fast learning algorithm
for deep belief nets,” Neur. Comput., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1527–1554, Jul.
2006.
[32] E. Sariyildiz, H. Yu, and K. Ohnishi, “Gradient-based learning applied
to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11, pp.
2278–2324, Nov. 1998.

14

[33] Z. Zhang, Y. Song, and H. Qi, “Age progression/regression by conditional adversarial autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., Hawaii, USA, Jul. 2017, pp. 5810–5818.
[34] F. Bellard, “BPG image format,” Available: https://bellard.org/bpg/,
2018.
[35] S. Heron, “Advanced encryption standard (aes),” Netw. Security, vol.
2009, no. 12, pp. 8–12, Dec. 2009.
[36] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[37] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE.” J.
Mach. Learn. Research, vol. 9, no. 11, Nov. 2008.
[38] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block
and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp.
429–445, Mar. 1996.
[39] H. Vikalo, B. Hassibi, and T. Kailath, “Iterative decoding for MIMO
channels via modified sphere decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 3,
no. 6, pp. 2299–2311, Spet. 2004.

