1

Distributed Information Bottleneck Theory for
Multi-Modal Task-Aware Semantic Communication

I. I NTRODUCTION
Recent development of mobile communication systems,
especially 6G, is moving beyond the traditional goal of simply
improving the data transportation performance, such as data
rates or delivery latency, but focuses on ubiquitous intelligence, a shift toward supporting highly diversified and personalized services for a vast array of users and devices [2]. Unlike
traditional communication systems that focus on symbol-level
accuracy, 6G aims to deliver tailored services that adapt to
the specific functional and task-aware needs of the receiver.
Within this landscape, semantic communication has emerged
as a promising solution. By prioritizing the transmission of
task-relevant information and “semantic meaning” delivery, it
has the potential to significantly improve the communication
efficiency and enable Quality-of-Experience (QoE)-enhanced
A preliminary version of this paper was presented at IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), Montreal, Canada, June 2025 [1].
Yujie Zhou, Cheng Peng, Rulong Wang, and Yong Xiao are with the
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. Yong Xiao is also
with Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, and Pazhou Laboratory
(Huangpu), Guangzhou, China (e-mail: {zhouyujie2357, m202372990, rulongwang, yongxiao}@hust.edu.cn).
Yingyu Li is with the School of Mechanical Engineering and Electronic
Information, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
liyingyu29@cug.edu.cn).
Guangming Shi is with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055,
China (e-mail: gmshi@xidian.edu.cn).
Ping Zhang is with the State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching
Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
China (email: pzhang@bupt.edu.cn).

80

6.0e+07

75
70

4.0e+07

FLOPs

Abstract—Semantic communication shifts the focus from bitlevel accuracy to task-relevant semantic delivery, enabling efficient and intelligent communication for next-generation networks. However, existing multi-modal solutions often process all
available data modalities indiscriminately, ignoring that their
contributions to downstream tasks are often unequal. This not
only leads to severe resource inefficiency but also degrades
task inference performance due to irrelevant or redundant
information. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel task-aware
distributed information bottleneck (TADIB) framework, which
quantifies the contribution of any set of modalities to given tasks.
Based on this theoretical framework, we design a practical coding
scheme that intelligently selects and compresses only the most
task-relevant modalities at the transmitter. To find the optimal
selection and the codecs in the network, we adopt the probabilistic
relaxation of discrete selection, enabling distributed encoders to
make coordinated decisions with score function estimation and
common randomness. Extensive experiments on public datasets
demonstrate that our solution matches or surpasses the inference quality of full-modal baselines while significantly reducing
communication and computational costs.

PA-MPJPE (mm)

arXiv:2510.04000v3 [cs.IT] 31 Dec 2025

Yujie Zhou, Cheng Peng, Rulong Wang, Yong Xiao, Yingyu Li, Guangming Shi, Ping Zhang

65
60

2.0e+07

55
50

1

2

3

4

5

# of Data Modalities

6

7

0.0e+00

1

2

3

4

5

# of Data Modalities

6

7

Fig. 1: Performance improvement and computational overhead w.r.t. modalities on MM-Fi. The more modalities involved (from left to right), the higher
the computational cost. However, the corresponding inference performance
does not increase monotonically when redundant/difficult-to-learn/irrelevant
modalities (e.g., RGB image and LiDAR) are added.

personalized service to meet the unique objectives of individual users [3], [4].
Despite its promise, most existing research in semantic
communication focuses on developing specific models or
source encoding schemes for signals with a single modality,
such as video [5], image [6], or voice signals [7]. This narrow
approach hampers the widespread application of semantic
communication systems, as many emerging use cases, such
as autonomous driving, immersive communication, and industrial digital twins, require the processing of multiple data
modalities at the same time. While some recent works have
explored the multi-modal semantic communication [8]–[12],
they often focus on the joint processing of datasets with all the
available modalities without distinction, ignoring the fact that
the contributions of different data modalities to each specific
task are generally different. For instance, a navigation task in
autonomous driving may heavily rely on visual and radar data
while treating the audio signal as relatively less important; conversely, a voice-assistant task may require mainly the acoustic
signal. Moreover, processing and compressing all available
modalities indiscriminately may undermine the core resourceefficiency benefits of semantic communication, leading to
unnecessary computational overhead and excessive energy
consumption at the edge [13]. Furthermore, recent results even
suggest that including irrelevant or redundant modalities of
data can, in some cases, cause decision-making ambiguity,
which may result in degraded performance, as the system
must filter through conflicting or distracting information when
executing specific tasks [14], [15].
To shed more light on the impact of processing various
combinations of data modalities on the performance of tasks,
we consider a multi-modal semantic communication system in
which the semantic encoder can observe various combinations

2

of seven distinct data modalities, including RGB images and
depth maps, as well as non-visual signals such as infrared,
LiDAR, mmWave, and WiFi CSI, collected when a human user
conducts different positions, and the main task at the receiver
is to accurately estimate the position based on the signals sent
by the encoder. We evaluate the task performance and computational efficiency based on procrustes-aligned mean perjoint position error (PA-MPJPE) and floating-point operations
(FLOPs) during inference, respectively. Our experimental results reveal a nuanced relationship between data diversity and
task accuracy. Initially, integrating additional data modalities
in position estimation leads to accuracy improvement. However, once the total number of considered modalities exceeds
a specific threshold, i.e., over four data modalities, the overall
accuracy begins to decline. Furthermore, this increase in data
modalities triggers a substantial increase in computational
demand, i.e., over 2.5 times increase in FLOPs when the
number of modalities exceeds 4, suggesting that indiscriminate
processing of all available modalities not only undermines
resource efficiency but can also introduce decision ambiguity,
leading to sub-optimal task performance. Currently, there is
still a lack of a unified framework that can evaluate how
different modalities contribute to various task requirements.
Developing such a framework is essential to bridge this gap,
enabling the encoder to intelligently identify and process only
the most critical modalities for a receiver’s intended tasks,
thereby truly fulfilling the 6G promise of efficient, taskoriented intelligence for everything.
Motivated by this observation, in this paper, we investigate
the multi-modal task-aware semantic communication from an
information-theory perspective. In particular, we propose a
novel theoretical framework based on distributed information
bottleneck (DIB), called task-aware DIB (TADIB), to quantify
the specific contributions of any given set of data modalities
for a specific task requirement. Our proposed framework
allows the semantic encoder to determine the minimal sufficient information required from the optimal combination of
modalities of data to satisfy a specific task’s requirements.
In this way, the encoder can intelligently filter and process
only the most critical data subsets, ensuring optimal resource
allocation and task performance at the receiver.
We briefly summarize the main contribution of this paper
as follows:
(1) Theoretical framework for modality selection: We propose the task-aware distributed information bottleneck
(TADIB) framework, which generalizes classical DIB
theory by introducing an optimized modality selection
mechanism as a new degree of freedom in the raterelevance tradeoff. This provides a theoretical foundation
for identifying the minimal sufficient set of modalities
required for specific tasks, enabling efficient multi-modal
semantic communication under resource constraints.
(2) Tractable optimization: We develop a probabilistic relaxation of TADIB (pTADIB), which transforms the discrete
modality-task selection into a probabilistic form. This
allows joint end-to-end optimization of selection policies
and semantic codecs via gradient-based methods, using
score function estimation and common randomness to

coordinate decisions across distributed devices. We also
provide a theoretical analysis proving the equivalence
between the primal TADIB and its probabilistic form.
(3) Empirical validation: Extensive experiments on public
multi-modal multi-task datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of TADIB. Compared to state-of-the-art baselines
(e.g., VDDIB and DLSC), TADIB achieves comparable
or better inference quality while reducing the number
of active modality-task links by up to 70.4% and the
communication rate by up to 43.6%. Moreover, TADIB
significantly reduces per-epoch training time by up to
90.6% compared to full-participation DIB-based methods, verifying its practical efficiency.

II. R ELATED W ORK
Recent research in semantic communication has shifted
focus from data reconstruction to the recovery of task-relevant
information at the receiver. While foundational works [16]–
[18] primarily address single-modal, single-task scenarios, the
field is rapidly evolving to handle more complex, realistic
settings involving multiple modalities and tasks. Initial efforts in multi-modal semantic communication [8]–[10] often
operate under a non-cooperative paradigm, where each task
independently processes its own multi-modal dataset. More
recent studies [11], [12] advance this by investigating joint or
cooperative multi-tasking across distributed devices. However,
a common and limiting assumption persists across much of
this literature: that all available data modalities from all transmitters are essential for every receiver’s task. This approach
leads to the indiscriminate processing and transmission of full
modality sets, which contradicts the core efficiency promise of
semantic communication. This oversight creates critical gaps.
Processing and transmitting all modalities irrespective of their
task relevance leads to unnecessary computational overhead,
excessive energy consumption, and sub-optimal use of limited
channel capacity [13]. And as discussed in our introduction
and supported by experimental evidence (e.g., Fig. 1), including redundant or irrelevant modalities can introduce decisionmaking ambiguity and actually degrade task performance.
Some works have begun to address resource constraints. For
instance, [13] considers modality selection, but is limited
to a single-task context and does not account for inter-task
correlations or the collective link occupancy in multi-task
scenarios. Furthermore, many DL-based solutions [8]–[10]
prioritize inference quality without theoretical guarantees on
the optimal rate-relevance trade-off. While other approaches
like [19] tackle rate adaptation from a physical-layer channel
coding perspective, their focus is orthogonal to the fundamental problem of source-level, task-aware redundancy elimination
across multiple modalities. Our work bridges this gap by
proposing TADIB designed explicitly for optimal modality
selection and coding in multi-modal multi-task semantic communication. It provides a principled method to identify and
transmit only the most task-relevant information from the
most critical modality subsets, guaranteeing both efficiency
and performance.

3

III. BACKGROUNDS AND P RELIMINARIES
A. Distributed Information Bottleneck
1) Development Sequence: The Tishby’s information bottleneck (IB) is first proposed in [20]. It is grounded in RD
theory [21]. Unlike the data reconstruction emphasized by the
RD-based lossy compression, IB focuses on recovering the
hidden meaning or semantics in the data under a rate limit. In
which the meaning is introduced as a relevant hidden variable
according to the raw data. It extracts the relevant information
of targets (meaning) from raw signals to yield representations
that are minimally informative about raw signals and maximally informative about targets, in which the informativeness
is measured by MI. The current work [22] indicates that IB
is essentially a remote source coding problem in which the
distortion is measured under logarithmic.
Work [23] extends IB theory to distributed scenarios as
DIB, which involve multiple transmitters and a receiver. This
extension is rigorous, which follows the classical result [24],
[25] to characterize the optimal rate-relevance tradeoff region.
IB-based coding can be implemented efficiently. The work
[26] establishes the deep variational IB (VIB), which utilizes
variational techniques and deep learning-based parameterization schemes to achieve IB. By applying the powerful gradient
backpropagation in the learning paradigm, the feasibility of IB
has been greatly enhanced. This also illustrates that leveraging
DIB to establish multi-modal multi-task semantic communication systems is promising: it is theoretically grounded in
information theory and can be efficiently implemented by DL.
2) DIB for Semantic Communication: DIB offers an
information-theoretic framework that naturally aligns with
semantic communication goals. Note that semantic communication aims to transmit task-relevant meaning rather than
raw data. DIB realizes this goal by seeking a compressed
representation that maximally preserves information about a
task target signal while being minimally informative about
the raw observation. This rate-relevance tradeoff, balancing
representation compactness against predictive power, captures
the core efficiency goal of semantic communication: minimizing communication cost without sacrificing task performance.
Recent works [16], [27]–[29] have noticed this connection and
developed a branch of semantic communication based on DIB.
3) A Quick Review of DIB: In the remainder of this part,
we provide a review of the DIB theory. The classical IB aims
to find the optimal way to extract a representation Z from
a random variable X that preserves the relevant information
about a task-relevant signal Y . This is framed as minimizing
the rate, namely, the MI between X and Z, I(X; Z), while
maximizing the MI between Z and Y , I(Z; Y ), equivalently,
minimizing the conditional entropy H(Y |Z) by I(Z; Y ) =
H(Y ) − H(Y |Z) with a stationary source entropy H(Y ).
The DIB extends the above theoretical framework to scenarios involving multiple encoders, each has a set of locally
observed data samples. A standard DIB consists of K encoders
and a single decoder for recovering the target signal Y ,
where each encoder converts its local observation Xk to a

low-dimensional and low-rate feature Zk . With a Lagrangian
multiplier β ≥ 0, we expect encoders to satisfy the following
n
minp(zk |xk ) LDIB [p(zk |xk )]
o
X
(1)
:= H(Y |ZK ) + β
(H(Y |Zk ) + I(Xk ; Zk )) ,
k∈K

where ZK = {Z1 , ..., ZK } and β corresponds to the weighting
factor. H(·|·) is the conditional entropy (CE). This expression
implicitly controls the sum-rate I(XK ; ZK ) to be less than a
certain value, as this objective, in the form of a Lagrangian, has
transformed the rate constraint into the control of the multiplier
β. This corresponds to the result of [23], [25].
B. Notations
We first clarify the main notations used in this paper. Calligraphic letters (e.g., X ) denote sets or functionals, uppercase
letters (e.g., X) represent random variables or constants, and
lowercase letters (e.g., x) represent elements of sets. Boldface
letters (e.g., x or X) emphasize vector structures. We denote
the cardinality of a set X by |X |. The distribution induced by
a random variable X is denoted by PX , and its probability
density function (pdf) or probability mass function (pmf) by
pX . The Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between two distridP
] where
butions P and Q is given by DKL (P ∥Q) ≜ EP [log dQ
P ≪ Q. The mutual information (MI) between random variables X and Z is defined as I(X; Z) ≜ DKL (PXZ ∥PX PZ ).
The notation [N ] abbreviates the index set {1, ..., N }. Sometimes, we explicitly write a vector in component form, e.g.,
x = (x1 , ..., xN ) = (xn )n∈[N ] = (xn )N
n=1 = (xn )n . These
notations are all equivalent. Throughout, the last form is usually used to simplify the expression if the index representation
element, e.g., n, is clear from the context.
IV. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We consider a multi-modal task-aware semantic communication system, as illustrated in Fig. 2, in which a set of
different modalities of data M, generated by an implicit
semantic information source, can be observed by the encoder
and the main objective of the system is to perform a set of T
downstream tasks, denoted as T , based on the semantics of the
source recovered by the decoder. Let Xm be the mth modality
of data that can be observed by the encoder. We use XM(t)
to denote the raw data associated with a subset of modalities
M(t) for M(t) ⊆ M. Let Yt be the semantics (target signal)
that is required at the receiver end to perform task t for t ∈ T .
We also use YT to denote the desired set for the receiver to
perform a set T of downstream tasks.
As observed from the motivation example in our Introduction, different data modalities do not contribute equally
to the performance of each task, and a carefully selected
subset of modalities is often sufficient to achieve the desired
quality when serving the downstream tasks at the receiver.
Therefore, in this paper, we focus on the task-aware semantic
extraction and recovery problem in a resource-constrained
semantic communication system. In this case, for a set of tasks
T , the semantic encoder will select a subset of modalities of

4

Modality
Selection

Observation

Encoder

Channel

Decoder

Transmitters

Receivers

Fig. 2: Overview of a general multi-modal task-aware semantic communication system.

its observed data to be compressed into a set of semantic representations sent to the channel. The compressed representations
need to be not only efficient for physical channel transmission
but also sufficient for the decoder to recover the required target
signals to perform the downstream tasks.
Suppose there exists a modality selection operation υ that
can output the subset of modalities of data that is sufficient for extracting
the required
semantics for tasks T , i.e.,
F
F
M(T ) = t M(t) where represents the disjoint union, that
is, if multiple tasks (e.g., T tasks) select the same modality,
this modality w.r.t. different tasks will appear T times in
M(T ) (rather than only once). In this case, we often call
M(T ) the set of selected modality-task links. Each element
is a link (pair) of modalities and tasks. We then define the
stochastic encoder and decoder for the task-aware semantic
communication system as follows:
Definition 1. For an arbitrary set of data XM(T ) generated
from a set of semantic sources with semantics YT , we define a
encoder f as a mapping that outputs a representation ZM(T )
from input XM(T ) , i.e., f : XM(T ) → ZM(T ) . We also
define a decoder g as a mapping that outputs a set of recovered
semantics ŶT based on the representation ẐM(T ) received
from the channel, i.e., g : ẐM(T ) → ŶT .
The above problem can be directly formulated using the
DIB theory, an information-theoretical framework focusing
on extracting the minimally sufficient statistical representation
from distributed data sources, i.e., modalities, that maximize
the information between the representation and the targeted
downstream tasks. More formally, we can formulate the taskaware semantic encoding and decoding problem as follows:
Xn
min
LTA [υ, f, g] :=
H(Yt |ZM(t) )
υ,f,g:M(T )∈A

+β

t∈T

X

H(Yt |Zm,t ) + I(Xm ; Zm,t )

o (P1 )
,

m∈M(t)

where υ denotes the selection operation, f denotes the encoder,
and g denotes the decoder. g can be fully determined if the
exact forms of encoder f and data distributions are given
[27, Appendix A]. As thus, we often omit g for convenience,
e.g., LTA [υ, f ] = LTA [υ, f, g(f, υ)] = LTA [υ, f, g]. Besides,
A is the feasible region of the selected set M(T ) given by
physical resource constraints. The conditional entropy (CE)
H(Yt |ZM(t) ) measures the multi-modal quality for task t, and
the CE H(Yt |Zm,t ) measures the single-modal one. The MI
I(Xm ; Zm,t ) measures the single-modal rate.
This expression unifies selection with coding as optimizable
variables, extending (1) to multi-modal multi-task cases. Since
it is based on DIB, the modality-fused ZM(t) can be depicted
with a low information rate while maintaining high semantic
recovery quality.

It can be observed that solving this problem (P1 ) is quite
challenging due to the following reasons. First, finding the
optimal set of links M(T ) w.r.t. υ for solving tasks is difficult
since there is still lacking a general metric for measuring the
relevance between raw data and tasks. Second, multiple data
modalities and tasks are usually scattered in a decentralized
resource-constrained network. This increases the difficulty
of evaluating the metric, as coordination among distributed
devices is required, where there does not exist an “oracle” that
can access all devices’ raw data and tasks. Third, calculating
the terms at the RHS of the expression and ideal decoder g
in terms of f is practically infeasible, since the exact joint
distributions of sources are unknown in realistic cases, and
only accessible via finite empirical samples.
In the following sections, we will first establish a metric
to optimally evaluate the contribution made by the modality
corresponding to the task. Then, we specify how to choose
the optimal set in the general case of a distributed network
with resource constraints based on the metric. Subsequently,
we perform a computationally tractable transformation of
this original problem based on variational approximation and
parameterization to derive an algorithmic solution.
V. TASK - AWARE M ODALITY C ONTRIBUTION M ETRIC
To select the appropriate modalities of data to process
according to the requirements of downstream tasks at the
receiver, we need first to develop a metric to measure the
relevance/contribution of different modalities of data for T .
A. General Definition of Task-Modality Score
In this paper, we propose a novel metric, called the taskmodality score, to quantify the volume of information that can
be provided by a subset of modalities of data for downstream
tasks.
Definition 2. Given a set of modality-task links M(T )
corresponding to υ, the relevance metric R : A → R is a
set-to-scalar function, defined as
R (M(T )) = min LTA [υ, f, g].
f,g

(2)

The lower the value of R, the higher the data-task relevance
captured by the set of modality-task links M(T ) ∈ A for
downstream tasks T .
The definition of R is straightforward and optimal to (P1 ):
if we select the set M(T )⋆ that has the minimal value of
R(M(T )) over all sets satisfying the constraint, then we
achieve the optimum of (P1 ). This is due to the commutativity
of minimum, i.e.,
min

M(T ),f,g

LTA = min min LTA = min R(M(T )),
M(T ) f,g

M(T )

(3)

5

where υ is replaced by its induced M(T ) equivalently.
Note that our proposed R(·) is fundamentally different from
the existing solution that measures the contribution of each
data modality based on the marginal contribution. Previous
works [1], [13], [27] typically adopt a two-phase approach:
they first assign each individual modality-task link a relevance
value based on pre-defined metrics, then select the top-k links
with the highest values to form the final selected set. This
type of scheme, however, suffers from several fundamental
limitations that lead to sub-optimality. First, they evaluate
the contribution of each modality for a task independently,
ignoring the complex interactions among different modalities
and tasks. This means that to some extent, they estimate the
average benefit of choosing the link rather than the maximum
benefit of the selected set that include this one. Second, they
often rely on heuristic/pre-defined metrics that lack theoretical
guarantees for optimality. Note that the optimal subset should
be induced by the original objective (P1 ) itself, rather than
by artificially pre-defined metrics. Our proposed metric R(·)
overcomes these limitations by directly evaluating the overall
contribution of the selected set to the entire task set, ensuring
optimality as shown in (3).
B. Applying the Score for Multi-modal Multi-task Dataset
While Definition 2 establishes the theoretical optimality of
R(·), its direct calculation on realistic multi-modal multi-task
datasets faces the challenge that the true joint distributions of
data and tasks are unknown. To make this metric a general
tool for measuring task-modality relationships in a wide of
practical applications, we take an approximation that bridges
information theory with data-driven learning system. Applying
the score to a dataset involves two key approximations, which
we formally detail in the following Section VII and VIII. Here,
let us directly preview the results and show how to calculate
the task-modality score on datasets.
t
Let a dataset of task t be Dt := {(Xti , Yti )}N
i=1 with |Dt | =
Nt samples. Then,
Proposition 1. For a set of modality-task links M(T ) w.r.t.
υ on datasets {Dt }t∈T , its corresponding task-modality score
R (M(T )) is empirically estimate by
R (M(T )) ≈ min

ϕ,φ,ψ

Xn
t∈T

N

−

t
1 X
i
log qϕt (yti |zM(t)
)
Nt i=1

N

+β

X
m∈M(t)
N

t
1 X
+
log
Nt i=1

t
1 X
i
−
log qφt (yti |zm,t
)
Nt i=1

(4)

i
o
pψm,t (zm,t
|xim,t )
,
P
Nt
j
1
i
j=1 pψm,t (zm,t |xm,t )
Nt

where parameters ϕ := (ϕt )t , φ := (φt )t , ψ := (ψt )t are
corresponding to optimizable codec f and g defined in (P1 ).
The approximation is exact at the limit Nt → ∞ for all t ∈ T .
Proof. It follows from the key results in Section VII and VIII,
esp., Proposition 2 and expressions (22)-(24).
Generality and benefits: The approximation in Proposition 1
provides a general-purpose tool for evaluating the contribution

of any modality subset to a set of tasks, using only finite
samples from the dataset. This is applicable to a wide range of
complex multi-modal and multi-task scenarios. For instance, in
autonomous driving, one can assess whether LiDAR, camera,
or radar data are most relevant for obstacle detection or trajectory prediction. Thus, by only processing the relevant data
modalities, we can better meet the requirements of low latency
and high reliability. This flexibility aligns with the original
motivation: to transmit only the most relevant information
for tasks, thereby saving communication and computation
resources while maintaining inference quality.
Dependence on samples and parameters: The empirical
estimate of R(M(T )) in Proposition 1 depends critically on
two factors: the sample size Nt and the parameter optimization
over ϕ, φ, ψ. First, the estimate is asymptotically unbiased: as
Nt → ∞ for each task t, the law of large numbers ensures
that the empirical averages converge to the true expectations.
With finite data, the estimate exhibits variance that can affect
the reliability of modality comparisons. Second, the inner
minimization over codec parameters is non-convex and subject to the limitations of gradient-based optimization. If the
parameterized function families (e.g., neural networks) do not
contain the optimal codecs, or if the optimization fails to reach
the global minimum due to local optima or inadequate training,
the estimated score becomes an upper bound of the true
minimal R. This means that in practice, we are evaluating an
upper bound of the task-modality relevance, which, however,
may still be effective for comparative selection if the bias is
consistent across different modality sets. These dependencies
underscore the importance of sufficient data and effective
optimization in making the score a reliable guide for modality
selection. In the experimental phase, we pointed out that the
estimation relying on data and parameters remains valid.
Limitations and the need for scalable optimization: Despite
its generality, directly applying Proposition 1 to find the optimal modality-task set M(T )⋆ = arg minM(T ) R(M(T )) is
computationally prohibitive. The number of possible modalitytask sets grows exponentially with the number of modalities
and tasks: for M modalities and T tasks, there are 2M T possible selections. Evaluating R for each candidate set requires
solving an inner optimization over codec parameters (ϕ, φ, ψ),
which is expensive even for a single set. This exhaustive search
is clearly infeasible for practical systems where M and T
can be large. Therefore, we need a scalable and coordinated
method that can efficiently identify the minimal-score selection
without enumerating all possibilities. Moreover, in distributed
networks, modalities and tasks are often scattered across different devices, further complicating centralized computation.
How to address limitations in general distributed cases: To
address the above, the following sections develop a distributed
optimization framework that jointly learns the selection policy
and the codecs in a single end-to-end process. Instead of
evaluating R for every possible set, we introduce a probabilistic relaxation that transforms the discrete selection into
a continuous optimization problem. This approach not only
bypasses the combinatorial explosion but also aligns with
the decentralized nature of real-world multi-modal networks.
We detail this in following sections, where we show how to

6

Task-aware modality selection for task 1
Unimodal
Encoder 1

...

Unimodal
Encoder M

Decoder 1
Receiver 1

Transmitter 1
Unimodal
Encoder 1
Unimodal
Encoder M

Decoder T
Receiver T

Transmitter K
Task-aware modality selection for task T

Fig. 3: Task-aware modality selection in general distributed networks. Modalities (tasks) are distributed at different transmitters (receivers).

efficiently find the minimizer of R(·) in a network setting.
VI. I N -N ETWORK TASK - AWARE M ODALITY S ELECTION
We now specify how to perform the task-aware modality selection in a general distributed network based on the proposed
metric R(·). We first refine the above multi-modal task-aware
semantic communication system model in such a network,
as illustrated in Fig. 3, then present an approach to find the
minimizer of R.
A. Network Setting
Distributed transmitters and receivers: Different modalities
are observed at different transmitters. We use K := {1, ..., K}
to denote the set of transmitters. Each transmitter k ∈ K
observes its own multi-modal data Xk , consisting of M
different modalities, represented as Xk := (Xk1 , ..., XkM ). All
such Xk recover the total data X := (X1 , ..., XK ). Each
transmitter’s data is unique, though potentially correlated, and
yields a joint distribution PX = PX1 ...XK . In this case,
the aforementioned complete modality set M is given by
M := {(k, m) : k ∈ K, m ∈ [M ]} with |M| = KM . Also,
the modality component Xm is now represented as Xkm . We
also use T := {1, ..., T } to denote the set of receivers, where
we assume that each receiver focuses on a single task and
different receivers focus on different tasks.
Distributed semantic encoding: Each transmitter holds its
m
respective encoder fkm : Xkm × T → Zk,t
, to extract the lowdimensional feature of the locally observed data modality m
that captures the most-relevant information for the receiver t
to perform its intended task. In this case, the aforementioned
m
representation Zm,t is now specified as Zk,t
. For every m ∈
m
[M ], we introduce such a mapping fk at k. All such encoders
form the encoder f := {fkm }m,k .
Modality-task link selection, distributed selectors, and link
limits: We say a modality-task link, i.e., (k, m, t), is selected
if the transmitter k provides the feature of the modality m for
the receiver’s task t. Formally, we introduce a binary indicator
function ak,m,t to denote the selection, where ak,m,t = 1
if (k, m, t) is selected, and ak,m,t = 0 otherwise. E.g., all
the transmitters are capable of communicating with all the receivers simultaneously, then the maximum number of selected
modality-task links is KM T . In so doing, we explicitly have
a := M(T ) := {(k, m, t) : ak,m,t = 1}, and corresponding

KM T -dimensional vectors XM(T ) := (ak,m,t Xkm )k,m,t and
m
ZM(T ) := (ak,m,t Zk,t
)k,m,t .
However, due to the limited channel capacity and computational capability, only a subset of these links are available:
|M(T )| < KM T . We now define the feasible region A of
M(T ) in this setting. We consider the following generally
practical case: Each transmitter k can only provide a subset
Mk of its modality-based features to all receivers,
X
|Mk | ≤ Ek ⇔
ak,m,t ≤ Ek ,
(5)
m,t

where Ek ≤ M T is the number of selected links at k. We
introduce a selector υk for the transmitter k to decide links
for all given tasks t ∈ Tk ⊆ T that access k, where the selected
links do meet the above: Given k, Mk = υk (Tk ) that satisfies
X
Mk = {(k, m, t) : ak,m,t = 1,
ak,m,t ≤ Ek }. (6)
m,t

Besides, each receiver t can only access a subset of transmitters Kt ⊆ K to obtain features
for its task, i.e.,
X
max ak,m,t ≤ Et ,
(7)
|Kt | ≤ Et ⇔
k

m

where Et ≤ K is the number of selected transmitters at t. In
this case, the maximum operation over m at k implies that the
k-th transmitter is selected if any modality m of k is selected.
This constraint is valid that due to the data privacy concerns,
the receiver typically cannot access the transmitter’s raw data.
As a result, the transmitter’s modality information remains
inaccessible, like a black box, to the receiver, accessible only
through the transmitter itself. We also introduce a selector υt
for the receiver t to decide Kt for task t. Given t, Kt = υt (K)
that satisfies
X
Kt = {k : ak,m,t = 1,
max ak,m,t ≤ Et }.
(8)
k

m

Also, in terms of all {Kt }t , we can formally define Tk of
k: Tk := {t : this k ∈ Kt , ∀t ∈ T }. Now, with all the
established selectors υ := (υk , υt ), we can finally derive the
set M(T ) in terms of Tk and Mk by υ, which corresponds
to the selection operation we defined in the general system
model. To summarize, we instantiate the feasible region A of
M(T ) in (P1 ) as the above constraints (5) and (7).
Communication channel and rate limits: The selected features ZM(T ) are assumed to be transmitted to the receivers
via communication channels. Throughout, we consider the
standard error-free channels with the channel capacity limits,
this means that ẐM(T ) = ZM(T ) under a sum-rate limit,
i.e.,R ≥ I(XM(T ) ; ZM(T ) ), which is implicitly controlled
by the multiplier β-controlled trade-off in (P1 ) following (1)
[23, Proposition 2].
Semantic decoding: Each receiver t ∈ T aims to execute its
respective semantic inference task by a fused representation
ZM(t) , which is essentially a sub-vector of ZM(T ) corresponding to a fixed t. It attempts to recover its target Yt via a
decoder gt : ZM(t) → Yt . Let the recovered target be Ŷt . All
such decoders form the decoder g := {gt }t .
As aforementioned, the goal is to recover the true YT =
(Yt )t∈T as precisely as possible via ŶT = (Ŷt )t∈T under the
above limits. We should find the optimal selectors and codecs
to achieve this goal.

7

B. Finding the Optimal Set in Probability
While theoretically optimal, calculating the metric R for
each possible set is extremely intractable. In the rest of this
section, we develop a computationally feasible approximation
via probability tools. Enumeration is feasible to obtain a⋆ :=
arg mina R(a) for small K and T , however with unaffordable
computation costs if the number of devices becomes large: the
cardinality of A grows exponentially, i.e., |A| = 2KM T . We
should find a more efficient way to obtain the optimal set.
Note that the selection is decided prior to the transmission
of features. We can randomize the full a as its random variable
counterpart A following an initial distribution PA . In so doing,
our goal transforms to finding the optimal distribution PA⋆ that
assigns probability mass close to one to that optimal a⋆ , i.e.,
arg mina R(a) ⇒ arg minPA EPA [R(A)].

(9)

This transformation has several advantages. Since task and
data distributions are arbitrary, the uniqueness of a⋆ can not be
guaranteed. For example, if X1 , ..., XK are iid (independent
and identically distributed), then any a ∈ A is optimal. In this
case, it is unfaithful for selectors to return a deterministic a,
while returning a randomized A can capture all the optimal
a ∈ supp(A) = A . More importantly, instead of directly solving the intractable mina R(a), this randomized version, i.e.,
minPA EPA [R(A)], can be directly addressed by conducting
gradient-based methods on PA . In the remainder of this paper,
we refer to PA as the selection policy corresponding to a.
C. Vectorized Representation of Modality-Task Links
Let us introduce a representation vector of a as the boldface
counterpart a in {0, 1}KM T in terms of the indicator ak,m,t ,
which puts 1 for selected links and 0 for unselected ones. By
using such a vector, we can express more clearly how the links
we chosen affect the original problem quantitatively.
Let us clarify its composition step by step. Each selector υt
at receiver-side yields the selected set Kt . Then, we define a
vector corresponding to Kt , i.e.,
at := (max ak,m,t )K
k=1 ,
m

(10)

where max over m at k marginalizes the modality information
that is not selected by the receiver t. This at denotes all transmitters selected by the receiver t, which is K-dimensional.
Then, for transmitter-side υk , we also define
ak := (ak,m,t )M
m=1 .

(11)

This ak denotes all modalities selected by the transmitter k
for the task t, which is M -dimensional.
For this task t, we can fully express the selected modalitytask links as KM -dimensional vector by the Kronecker product of at and ak , i.e., ak,t := ak ⊗ at , that is,
ak,t = (a1,1,t , ..., a1,M,t , a2,1,t , ..., aK,M,t ),

(12)

with the fact that ak,m,t = ak,m,t maxm ak,m,t .
Enumerating all the tasks t ∈ T , we finally obtain a KM T dimensional representation vector a for a, i.e.,
a = ⊕Tt=1 ak,t = (ak,m,t )k,m,t ,

(13)

where ⊕ denotes the concatenation operation. In terms of the
above notations, we can rewrite the constraint as
X
max ak,m,t ≤ Et ⇔ ∥at ∥ ≤ Et ,
(14)
k

m

X

ak,m,t ≤ Ek ⇔ ∥

(k)
t ak,t ∥ ≤ Ek ,

P

(15)

m,t

where a(k) represents a sub-vector of a from M (k − 1)+1-th
dimension to M k-th dimension and ∥ · ∥ denotes the ℓ1 norm.
We also obtain the randomized version of vectors by replacing
the lowercase letters with uppercase ones.
D. Cooperative Selection Policy for Distributed Network
The selectors of distributed devices are also distributed. We
cannot directly access such a global distribution PA . We have
to express this PA by all distributed selectors. This means that
PA should be decomposed into components, each of which can
be computed locally on each device (transmitter or receiver).
In this case, we let PA be cooperative, satisfying the following,
Definition 3. We say policy PA is cooperative if there exists
an auxiliary variable U such that
QT
QK
PAAT U = PU t=1 PAt |U k=1 PA(k) |Ak U ,
(16)
k,t

t

where AT := (At )t and Akt is the k-th component of At . We
use a set PA to denote all the PA satisfying (14) and (15),
i.e., falling into the feasible region A ⊆ A.
Intuitively, this property is explained as follows. We expect
that each selector can locally decide its selection via a shared
(random) observation, e.g., a common time frame. Specifically,
we assume a common random variable U ∼ PU on all devices,
independent of data. Each At behaves following PAt |U . This
means that each υt decides Q
At with a common U . Also, each
K
Ak,t follows PAk,t |At U = k=1 PA(k) |Ak U . This means that
t
k,t
each υk provides modalities for each task t independently by
observing the request signals from receivers and this common
random signal U . Gathering all the local decisions, we finally
have the global set of modality-task links A.
In other words, this implies a type of conditional independence: given the shared information, the local decision can be
made individually. In terms of Definition 3, we can establish
the problem of randomized optimal set search, corresponding
to (P1 ), formally as
min

PA :PA ∈PA

EPA [R(A)].

(17)

Remark 1. This shared variable corresponds to a type of prior
information, common randomness (CR) [30], often considered
in distributed coordination. CR implicitly exists in our problem
formulation. In the pioneer DIB [23, Theorem 1], this CR has
been introduced and used as a time-sharing variable. When we
apply the CR-based coordination, we expect that all selectors
know each other’s decisions when this common U is observed.
Remark 2. CR can be arbitrarily designed. A common degradation case is that when we set it to a constant (no additional
information is shared among devices), the conditional independence on U is replaced by the stronger independence: Each

8

selector decides its selection independently. Even under such
assumptions, we can still prove that this randomization method
can reach the optimal set. This will be formally discussed in
Section IX.
Remark 3. CR can be implemented via some well-established
methods in practical distributed networks. For example, (i)
Synchronized clocks with seed agreement: Devices can use
loosely synchronized network time (e.g., via NTP or GPS) and
a pre-agreed pseudorandom generator seed to derive common
random samples per communication round. It is lightweight
and does not require continuous broadcasting. (ii) We can also
admit a coordinator to broadcast random samples to all devices
periodically.
E. Transformed Objective
In the preceding, we introduced a probability relaxation (17)
to search for the optimal set. Nevertheless, this expression does
not reflect the coupling between LTA and A. We formally show
it in the following.
Recall that υ denotes the selection operation. Then, we set
its randomized version to υp distinctively, which decides A
with PA ∈ PA . Expanding (17), we obtain the probabilistic
TADIB (pTADIB) problem:
min

EPA [R(A)] ⇔

min

LpTA [υp , f ],

(P2 )

A. Variational Decoding
Any ideal decoder gt perceives its respective modalityfused representation ZM(t) (equivalently, Ak,t ◦ Zt ), to return
the best prediction for Yt based on the representation. This
gt , inducing the conditional probability PYt |Ak,t ◦Zt , and its
m , can be fully
local unimodal version gk,t , inducing PYt |Zk,t
determined by a Markov chain [27, Appendix A] if data and
encoders are given. However, directly calculating such terms
via high-dimensional integrals is highly difficult [23], [27].
m ,
We use variational distributions, QYt |Ak,t ◦Zt and QYt |Zk,t
to approximate the CE terms in RHS of LTA that depend on
decoders by extending the approach [26].
Proposition 2. The following bounds hold given any k and t,
m
(i) An upper bound holds for H(Yt |Zk,t
):
m
m , QY |Z m )],
H(Yt |Zk,t
) ≤ EPZ m [H(PYt |Zk,t
(20)
t
k,t
k,t
R
where H(PY |Z , QY |Z ) := − p(y|z) log q(y|z)dy.
(ii) An upper bound holds for H(Yt |Ak,t ◦ Zt ) given Ak,t :

H(Yt |Ak,t ◦ Zt )
≤ EPZt |Ak,t [H(PYt |Ak,t ◦Zt , QYt |Ak,t ◦Zt )].

(21)

Proof. For details, please see Appendix A.

Note that PA is cooperative. We do a decomposition as

Based on Theorem 1 and Proposition 2, we can establish a
variational bound LpVTA [υp , f, g] ≥ LpTA [υp , f ] with a simple
replacement: we relax the LHS of (20) and (21) to the RHS.
In LpVTA [υp , f, g], we use g to emphasize all the variational
decoders by default. The additional “V” in “pVTA” refers to
“variational”.

Theorem 1. The probabilistic LpTA [υp , f ] can be rewritten
into a cooperative form with PA ∈ PA , i.e.,

B. Probability Parameterization

PA :PA ∈PA

υp ,f :PA ∈PA

where


LpTA [υp , f ] := EPA LTA [υp , f ] .

(18)

LpTA [υp , f ]
hX

i
= EPU
EPAk,t |U H(Yt |Ak,t ◦ Zt ) + β⟨Ak,t , LIB,t ⟩ ,
t

(19)


m
where EPAk,t |U [·] = EPAt |U EPAk,t |At U [·] , Zt := (zk,t
)m,k ,
⟨·, ·⟩ is the inner product, and LIB,t is a vector-valued
function

m
m
such that LIB,t := H(Yt |Zk,t
)+I(Xkm ; Zk,t
) m,k . It is KM dimensional and has the same shape as Ak,t (12). Also, we
let ◦ stand for Hadamard product (element-wise product).
Proof. For details, please see Appendix A.
Remark 4. In fact, the expression (19) is essentially a rewrite
of LTA that introduces randomness and is also re-described
using a vector structure. If we choose A always being a certain
specific a, then we recover the primal LTA .
VII. VARIATIONAL C ODING AND P ROBABILITY
PARAMETERIZATION
We now turn to the third challenge, given a fixed a. This
corresponds to estimating the intractable R(a). To this end,
we introduce variational decoders and computable bounds for
information terms of LTA . Then, we realize all optimizable
distributions as neural networks, including the policy PA .

Parameterization techniques enable optimizing tractable parameters in a typical finite-dimensional R-linear space, rather
than processing the function itself, which is often difficult. In
this part, we parameterize υp , f , and g, respectively, by deep
neural networks (DNNs). Let NN (·) be a DNN. We detail the
selection policy and coding modules as follows.
1) Selection: All the selectors must cooperatively generate
an A from the υp -induced probability Pθ;A|U where we define
T
θ := (θk )K
k=1 ⊕ (θt )t=1 . We now describe the structure of this
policy following Definition 3. The parameterized selector υk
is denoted by υθk , which induces different Pθ ;A(k) |Ak U for
k
t
k,t
different task t with a unified θk . The parameterized selector
υt is υθt , which induces Pθt ;At |U . CR U is pre-defined. Note
that all such distributions are essentially discrete.
Take Pθt as an example. When we directly implement pθt ,
i.e., the conditional probability mass of Pθt , by σ(NN (·; θt )),
where σ denotes softmax, the dimension of this DNN’s output
is exponentially large according to the dimension of at due to
that it must be capable of describing all possible 0-1 vectors
at . More precisely, this holds if for every possible realization
at , we use a corresponding dimension of the output to store its
mass. That is, we leverage a simple categorical distribution to
represent Pθt . Realizing pθt by this scheme requires an output
dimension on the order of O(2K ). The high space complexity

9

causes this simple DNN modeling to fail at large- or mediumscale device communication.
To fully tackle this issue in selection parameterization, we
apply a type of structural decomposition. We carefully design
a DNN for pθt in the following process. We implement a DNN
NN (·; θt ) whose input is u ∼ U and whose output is a nonnormalized R-vector πt , which is Et +K-dimensional. This πt
can be divided into two sub-vectors: the first Et -dimensional
part πt,num and also the second K-dimensional part πt,prob . The
number of selected transmitters ∥at ∥ is decided by the mass
σ(πt,num ). After given ∥at ∥, we can generate at following a
probability corresponding to a joint distribution that yields a
∥at ∥-times without-replacement sampling from σ(πt,prob ). We
can represent this joint distribution as σ ×∥at ∥ (πt,prob ). For any
value at , its mass is exactly a product of σ(πt,num )(at ) and
σ ×∥at ∥ (πt,prob )(at ) according to (probability) product rule.
This construction can be analogized and understood as that
we construct a “point process” by using a DNN. The number
of points (transmitters) is first determined, then their positions
(indices) are decided. Pθt can be regarded as a joint distribution over all points. This means that we introduce a structural
random prior to Pθt to reduce the space complexity O(2K ) to
O(K), where an exponential compression is achieved.
In the preceding, Pθt is used to show how to use DNN to establish each t-th receiver-side selector. For the transmitter-side,
we perform a similar treatment with a Ek + M -dimensional
vector. We omit this redundant part.
2) Coding: The parameterized encoder is denoted by fψ ,
where we define ψ := (ψkm )m,k . That is, for a modality m at
a transmitter k, we assign it individual parameters ψkm . For a
given task t, we have the unimodal encoder for a modality-task
m |X m .
link (k, m, t) as fψkm (·, t), which induces Pψkm ;Zk,t
k
Each unimodal encoder is implemented as a standard
Gaussian encoder [23], [27]. In other words, we utilize
NN (·, ·; ψkm ) to generate N (z|µ, Σ) (we omit all superscripts
and subscripts for convenience), in which the DNN’s input
is (x, t) and the output is (µ, Σ). µ is mean vector and Σ
is covariance matrix. Σ is usually diagonal, we can obtain
its vectorized version by multiplying its RHS by a uniform
vector 1 as Σ1. √
We apply the reparameterization trick to draw
z, i.e., z = µ + Σ1 ◦ ϵ with ϵ ∼ N (0, I), to allow gradient
backpropagation [26].
The parameterized decoder is denoted by gϕ,φ . The multimodal decoder that acts on the fused representation is denoted
by gϕt for task t, inducing the variational Qϕt ;Yt |Ak,t ◦Zt . For
transmitter k ’s modality m, the unimodal decoder is denoted
m . It means that for different
by gφt , which induces Qφt ;Yt |Zk,t
modalities, we adopt a common φt for efficient computation.
m
For any k and m, gφt acts on the local modality feature zk,t
and the index k and m, i.e., gφt (·; k, m). Finally, we realize
decoders by standard DNNs.
VIII. J OINT O PTIMIZATION OF S ELECTION AND C ODING
Note that if we aim to find the optimal selection of modalitytask links through R, we must also find corresponding optimal
codecs implied in the metric R. This implies a strong coupling
between selection and coding. Therefore, the joint optimization of selection and coding is a natural choice.

In this section, we implement an algorithm to optimize both
simultaneously. In so doing, through (3), we obtain the optimal
selection as well as the solution to the original problem (P1 ).
In this regard, we establish the empirical objective of LpVTA
for the parameterized modules with finite samples. Then, we
minimize it with gradient-based methods.
A. Empirical Objective
1) Dataset Settings: For any task t ∈ T , all available
labeled data are depicted as Dt := {(xi1,t , ..., xiK,t , yti )}N
i=1 ,
where all samples are iid and xik,t := (xm,i
)
.
In
which,
we
k,t m
add a subscript t at each xik,t to emphasize that the sample
belongs to the dataset specific to a task t. We assume a unified
data sample size |Dt | = N for any t ∈ T . Then, LpVTA can
be estimated by these labeled data D1 , ..., DT empirically.
2) Empirical Estimation: We estimate three key terms in
LpVTA as follows. At any t, for any k ∈ Kt , with 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N ,
we directly estimate the MI term integrated in LIB,t .


m
pψkm (zk,t
|xm
k )
m
m
I(Xk ; Zk,t ) = EPX m Z m log
m |xm )]
k
k,t
EPX m [pψkm (zk,t
k
k
(22)
m,i m,i
N
pψkm (zk,t |xk,t )
1 X
log 1 PN
.
≈
m,i m,j
N i=1
m
j=1 pψ (zk,t |xk,t )
N

k

We also estimate cross-entropy terms
m , QY |Z m )]
EPZ m [H(PYt |Zk,t
t
k,t
k,t

N

≈−

1 X
m,i
log qφt (yti |zk,t
; k, m).
N i=1

(23)

Given Ak,t , we have
EPZt |Ak,t [H(PYt |Ak,t ◦Zt , QYt |Ak,t ◦Zt )]
N

≈−

1 X
log qϕt (yti |Ak,t ◦ zti ).
N i=1

(24)

Since samples in Dt are iid, our empirical approximations,
i.e., (22)-(24), are asymptotically unbiased. In particular, the
m
crucial MI term I(Xkm ; Zk,t
) is successfully estimated without
variational or contrastive log-ratio bounds [31] since the parameterized conditional p(z|x) is explicitly given in this case.
We can approximate the marginal p(z) = Ex∼p(x) [p(z|x)] ≈
PN
1
i
i=1 p(z|x ) with Dt . In practice, we often use a miniN
batch of Dt to compute empirical estimations for efficiency.
Combine (22)-(24) to derive the empirical version,
min

θ,ψ,ϕ,φ:Pθ;A ∈PA
N

:=

L̂pVTA (θ, ψ, ϕ, φ)
T

hX

1 X
EPU
EPθ;Ak,t |U − log qϕt (yti |Ak,t ◦ zti ) (P3 )
N i=1
t=1
i
i
+ β⟨Ak,t , L̂IB,t ⟩ ,

where L̂IB,t is the empirical LIB,t with (22) and (23). We have
the analogue of (3) also in the empirical setting, i.e.,
min L̂pVTA = min min L̂pVTA ≈ min EPθ;A [R(A)]. (25)

θ,ψ,ϕ,φ

θ

ψ,ϕ,φ

θ

10

B. Gradient-based Optimization
It is challenging to directly backpropagate the gradients of
all parameters in addressing (P3 ) using conventional gradient
descent methods, even when reparameterization techniques are
used to design encoders. This difficulty arises because of the
peculiarities of Pθ;A . It is a discrete distribution and we cannot
directly apply a differentiable propagation of gradients due to
sampling. Let us detailedly discuss the update of parameters
in the following.
1) The Update of θ: Note that L̂pVTA (·) is essentially a
PN
function of θ. Let us abbreviate N1 i=1 − log qϕt (yti |Ak,t ◦

i
zti ) + β⟨Ak,t , L̂IB,t ⟩ as L̂t (Ak,t ) and omit ψ, ϕ, φ. Then, we
can transform the gradient w.r.t. θ into a score function, namely
the gradient of a log-likelihood,
i.e.,
h X
i
∇θ L̂pVTA (θ) = EPU
∇θ pθ (ak,t |u)L̂t (ak,t )
t,ak,t

= EPU

h X

i
pθ (ak,t |u)∇θ log pθ (ak,t |u)L̂t (ak,t )

t,ak,t

≈ ∇θ

N T
1 XX

N i=1 t=1
|

(26)
log pθ (aik,t |ui )L̂t (aik,t ),
{z

empirical estimation of log-likelihood

}

where the last approximation follows the Gibbs sampling, i.e.,
for every sample i, we assign realizations of U and ak,t as ui
and aik,t . Estimation (26) is unbiased and is also called policy
gradient following classical policy optimization [32].
2) The Update of Other Parameters: Unlike the above
complex transformations for θ, the reparameterization trick
[26] introduced in Section VII-B enables the gradients of
parameters ψ, ϕ, φ being directly calculated via backprop [33].
C. The Impact of Constrained Feasible Region
In the preceding, we usually assume the variational distribution of selectors being in PA by default. But the parameterized
Pθ;A ∈
/ PA usually holds, since DNN-based distributions are
randomly initialized. In this general case, supp(A) may fail to
meet constraints (14) and (15) in training, e.g, it is possible for
any transmitter k to have more than Ek times task inference
requests through its selector. E.g., Ek + 1 receivers request the
same transmitter k to solve different tasks at the same time,
which violates the constraint (15) if υk assigns each task t a
modality. To tackle this, we add a random choice mechanism
at transmitter-side that if the transmitter k receives Ek′ > Ek
times requests from receivers, then it will uniformly sample
Ek requests from these Ek′ ones to execute.
This addtional mechanism for addressing the concerns of
the constraint seems to introduce a mismatch that the set
of modality-task links A ∼ Pθ;A we choosen is somehow
different from the real selected set A′ after modification. We
investigate this mismatch in detail and point out that the policy
gradient still maintains the correct direction.
Specifically, the mechanism generates a stochastic mapping
with a kernel PA′ |A , which is a naturally non-parameterizable
conditional without exact forms, where the output A′ is regular
that satisfies (14) and (15). This means that we construct a new
Peθ;A′ = EPθ;A [PA′ |A ] ∈ PA which is always regular with the
externalized transition probability to be in the feasible region.

We replace Pθ;A with its regular version to recalculate the
policy gradient as (26), i.e.,
hX
i
∇θ L̂pVTA (θ) = ∇θ EPU
peθ (a′ |u)L̂t (a′ )
t,a′

= EPU

h X

p(a′ |a)pθ (a|u)∇θ log pθ (a|u)L̂t (a′ )

t,a′ ,a
N

≈ ∇θ

i
(27)

T

1 XX
log pθ (ai |ui )L̂t (ai,′ ),
N i=1 t=1

where we omitted the P
subscripts k, t of ak,t for convenience.
In which, peθ (a′ |u) = a p(a′ |a)pθ (a|u) is basically derived
from Peθ;A′ = EPθ;A [PA′ |A ] with the fact that A′ ↔ A ↔ U
for any t. The last approximation is also vaild due to the Gibbs
sampling, while the difference is that besides pθ (a|u), we also
empirically estimate the transition probability p(a′ |a).
By comparing (27) with (26), we observe that the empirical
estimation of log-likelihood is basically the same, except that
L̂t acts on the regularized version a′ rather than the primal a.
This proves our claim that the policy gradient still maintains
the correct direction. This is also the reason why we use policy
gradient, which works well when the workflow involves a nonparameterizable PA|A′ , while these cases, nevertheless, cannot
be tackled by traditional reparameterization, just as we do for
other parameters.
D. Training and Inference Procedure
Combining the above, we summarize the way to obtain the
optimal set of modality-task links as well as the corresponding
codecs in Algorithm 1 (training) and Algorithm 2 (inference).
In Algorithm 1, we solve the probabilistic relaxation of the
primal (P1 ). We get the optimal policy θ⋆ and corresponding
codecs ψ ⋆ , ϕ⋆ , φ⋆ . By sampling a⋆ from Pθ⋆ ;A|U in Algorithm
2, we achieve the numerical solution of (P1 ). In Step 3, the
synchronizing mechanism generates a common randomness
(CR) sample u ∼ PU through synchronized signals such
as time-sharing. This ensures all devices share the same
auxiliary variable u for coordinated selection decisions. For
degenerate cases, we can also set u to be a constant. In Step 5,
every receiver t independently samples its transmitter selection
vector at from the conditional distribution Pθt ;At |U =u . This
receiver-side selection determines which transmitters k with
akt = 1 will be requested to provide features. The selection
satisfies the receiver-side constraint (14), i.e., ∥at ∥ ≤ Et .
For general cases discussed in Section VIII-C, the condition
handling mechanism can be seamlessly integrated by replacing
the gradient update (26) with its regularized version (27). In
Step 8, each selected transmitter k (with akt = 1) samples
(k)
its modality selection vector ak,t from Pθ ;A(k) |Ak ,U . This
k
t
k,t
transmitter-side selection determines which modalities m with
(k),m
ak,t
= 1 will be encoded and transmitted to receiver t.
The cooperative policy structure (Definition 3) enables each
transmitter to make decisions based on both the receiver’s
request Akt (the k-th component of at ) and the common
randomness u. In Step 10, for each selected modality m
(k),m
with ak,t
= 1, a data sample xm
k,t is drawn from the

11

Algorithm 1: Training Procedure of pTADIB
Input: datasets {Dt }t∈T , batch size B.
Output: optimized parameters θ, ψ, ϕ, and φ.
1 initialize υp;θ , fψ , gϕ,φ ;
2 while not converged do
3
yield CR u ∼ PU from synchronizing mechanisms,
e.g., time-sharing;
4
for each receiver t ∈ T in parallel do
5
randomly select at ∼ Pθt ;At |U =u ;
6
request low-rate representations from
transmitters characterized by at ;
7
for each transmitter k with akt = 1 in parallel
do
(k)
8
randomly select ak,t ∼ Pθ ;A(k) |Ak =1,U =u ;
k

9
10

11

12

13
14

15

16
17
18
19

k,t

t

(k),m

for each modality m with ak,t = 1 do
synchronously sample xm
k,t from
m,i N
m
Dk,t := {xk,t }i=1 of Dt ;
m
given xm
encode zk,t
k,t as
q

m
m
m
= fψkm (xm
zk,t
k,t , t) = µk,t + Σk,t 1◦ϵ,
where ϵ ∼ N (0, I);
m
send all unimodal features zk,t
|a(k),m =1 to
k,t
the receiver t;
receive all features as ak,t ◦ zt ;
infer ŷt from the fused representation via
ŷt ∼ qϕt (Yt |ak,t ◦ zt );
(k),m
each unimodal decoder with ak,t = 1 infers
m
the local prediction ŷk,t
via
m
m
ŷk,t
∼ qφt (Yt |zk,t
; k, m);

collect all above data as a sample;
if B-batch samples are collected then
compute L̂pVTA with this mini-batch;
update parameters θ, ψ, ϕ, and φ through
techniques in Section VIII-B;

m
corresponding modality dataset Dk,t
. To ensure consistent gradient estimation across all tasks, the sampling from distributed
datasets is synchronized, meaning that for each sample index
i, all tasks t use the i-th sample from their respective local
datasets that aligns with a same label yti . In Steps 10-15, the
encoding and decoding processes are executed. Each encoder
m
fψkm generates the stochastic feature zk,t
using the reparameterization trick, enabling gradient backpropagation through
the sampling operation. After all features are transmitted to
receiver t, the multimodal decoder gϕt produces the fused
prediction ŷt from Ak,t ◦zt . Additionally, each unimodal local
m
decoder gφt generates local predictions ŷk,t
from individual
m
features zk,t . These local decoders serve as regularization
terms in the objective (19), encouraging encoders to preserve
task-relevant information in each unimodal feature independently, following the DIB principle [23]. In Steps 16-18, a
mini-batch of B samples is collected by repeating Steps 316 B times. The empirical objective L̂pVTA defined in (P3 ) is
then computed using this mini-batch, approximating the full
dataset expectation. In Step 19, all parameters θ, ψ, ϕ, and

Algorithm 2: Inference Procedure of pTADIB
Input: trained encoders, decoders, and selectors.
Output: predictions {ŷt }t∈T .
// Phase 1: Modality Selection
1 yield CR u ∼ PU ;
2 decide a ∼ Pθ;A|U =u induced by all selectors;
// Phase 2: Semantic Communication
3 while true do
4
for each receiver t ∈ T in parallel do
5
request low-dimensional representations from
transmitters characterized by at ;
6
for each transmitter k with akt = 1 in parallel
do
7
locally observe its raw data xk with
synchronization;
(k),m
8
for each modality m with ak,t = 1 do
m
m
9
encode zk,t given xk of xk ;
10

11
12

m
send all unimodal features zk,t
|a(k),m =1 to
k,t
the receiver t;
receive all features as Ak,t ◦ Zt ;
infer the prediction ŷt via
ŷt ∼ qϕt (Yt |Ak,t ◦ zt );

φ are updated jointly using gradient-based optimization. For
selection parameters θ, the policy gradient method (26) or (27)
is applied to handle the discrete sampling operation. For codec
parameters ψ, ϕ, and φ, standard backpropagation is used
thanks to the reparameterization trick. The backpropagation is
initiated at each receiver t in parallel, with gradients flowing
back through the decoders, encoders, and selectors.
The inference procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2.
In Step 1, a single CR sample u ∼ PU is drawn once at
the beginning using synchronized signals across all devices.
In Step 2, based on this fixed u, all selectors cooperatively
determine a deterministic selection a from the trained policy
Pθ;A|U =u . This can be done by taking the mode or expectation
of the conditional distribution given u. Once determined, this
selection a remains fixed throughout the inference phase,
maintaining stable communication links between receivers
and their selected transmitters with selected modalities. This
deterministic selection does not compromise optimality: if the
trained policy Pθ;A|U concentrates its probability mass on
optimal selections, then the derived a is still optimal (see
Theorem 2). During the continuous inference loop, each receiver t requests features only from transmitters and modalities
specified by a, and each transmitter k encodes and transmits
only the requested modalities. The receiver then fuses the
received features Ak,t ◦ Zt using the trained multimodal
decoder gϕt to produce predictions ŷt . Note that Algorithm
2 does not involve the local unimodal decoders gφt , which
are only used during training as regularization to support
the derivation of optimized encoders, decoders, and selectors,
following the work [23]. Finally, we emphasize that CR U is
low-dimensional (e.g., 24-48 dimensions in our experiments)
and needs to be generated only once per scheduling window
(e.g., per epoch in training, or per session in inference). The

12

communication overhead for distributing U (if required) is
negligible versus the feature data transmission. Furthermore,
in many standardized wireless protocols (e.g., 5G NR, WiFi 6),
time-synchronized frames are already used for medium access,
which can be naturally repurposed for CR alignment.
IX. F URTHER A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION
A. Optimal Rate-Relevance Tradeoff
From the perspective of the network information theory
[23], [25], we know that the primal (P1 ) achieves the optimal
rate-relevance tradeoff, i.e., the lowest communication cost
(sum-rate) at a given level of relevance between the true Yt
and the recovered Ŷt under a logarithmic loss.
However, this property may not always hold [23, Remark 4],
especially in the considered multi-modal multi-task scenario,
where each raw unimodal data may rely on multiple tasks. It is
exactly because the optimum under strict conditions is not usually achieved that we introduce a new degree of freedom, i.e.,
the task-aware selection of modality to control communication
links to further remove data redundancy among modalities to
reduce communication and computation costs. This elaborate
control allows a more efficient feature transmission than DIB.
We will empirically verify this statement in the next section.
B. Relations among Objectives
We summarize the relations among optimization objectives
of (P1 )-(P3 ) in the following. This guarantees our probabilistic
relaxation converges to the primal deterministic optimum.
Theorem 2. For objectives LTA , LpTA , LpVTA , and L̂pVTA
with a unified β ≥ 0 at any feasible solution of L̂pVTA , i.e.,
υp;θ , fψ , gϕ,φ , the following holds
a.e.

lim L̂pVTA (θ, ψ, ϕ, φ) = LpVTA [υp;θ , fψ , gϕ,φ ]

N →∞

(28)

≥ LpTA [υp;θ , fψ ].
Besides, their minimums satisfy
min

a.e.

lim L̂pVTA =

θ,ψ,ϕ,φ N →∞

min

υp;θ ,fψ ,gϕ ,gloc;φ

≥ min LpTA = min LTA .
υp ,f

LpVTA
(29)

υ,f,g

Proof. For details, please see Appendix B.
Remark 5. By introducing some mild assumptions, the asymptotic behavior from the empirical L̂pVTA to the expected LpVTA
can be more precisely characterized: the convergence rate is
O( √1n ), which corresponds to the concentration behavior in
probability. Due to being beyond the scope of this paper, a
detailed discussion is omitted here. For details, please see [34,
Chapter 3].
Remark 6. This theorem ensures that our transformation and
approximation minimally hurt the achievement of the minimizer of the primal (P1 ), while enhancing its tractability. The
crucial last equality in (29) strongly supports this point. Note
that the CR U is not mentioned in the theorem. It means that
no matter how we define CR U , it does not affect the validity
of the probability relaxation.

C. Selection for A Flexible Rate-Relevance Tradeoff
We study properties of optimal selection arg mina R(a) in
this part. We indicate that we can only claim the existence
of optimal selection at the capacity limits of all receivers
and transmitters, i.e., |Kt | = Et for all receivers t ∈ T and
|Mk | = Ek for all transmitters k ∈ K in a degenerate case
that β → 0. For general cases, the optimal selection may not
exist. Formally,
Proposition 3. Without the rate limit, i.e., β → 0, there always
exists a selection υ ⋆ that is optimal corresponding to (P1 ) with
|Kt⋆ | = Et for any t ∈ T and |M⋆k | = Ek for any k ∈ K.
Proof. For details, please see Appendix C.
Corollary 1. Without the rate limit, i.e., β → 0, there always
exists a selection policy υp⋆ that is optimal corresponding to
P (k),⋆
(P2 ) with ∥a⋆t ∥ = Et for any t ∈ T and ∥ t ak,t ∥ = Ek
for any k ∈ K.
Proof. It directly follows from (29) and Proposition 3.
Remark 7. In the case β → 0, communication costs essentially
captured by MI are ignored. That is, evaluating relevance-rate
tradeoff from (P1 ) degenerates to evaluating task relevance between transmitters’ modalities and receivers only. This results
that the more modalities are provided for a receiver, the better
the performance evaluated by (P1 ), because communication is
free. In the general case β > 0, Proposition 3 and Corollary
1 do not hold. It indicates that the optimal selection does not
necessarily exist on the boundary; it may also be located within
the interior since the non-degenerate tradeoff works. This also
illustrates that TADIB is more flexible than DIB since the
selection participates in the tradeoff. An interesting extreme
case is that even if we relax constraints, i.e., communication
links and computation capabilities, Ek and Et , to infinity, the
optimal participation may not be the full participation either.
We show the existence of this case in Fig. 13-14.
Remark 8. If hard constraints (14) and (15) are explicitly
given, we can find υp⋆ through our carefully constructed
pTADIB. But sometimes in practice, we only have a tendency
that, given a level of inference quality, we hope that all
devices have as few modality-task links as possible with
others for efficient transmission. Since the simpler network
connection topology implies lower complexity of scheduling,
synchronization, and communication at the physical system
level. In this case, we use the general multsiplier rule [35] to
let the count of a, i.e., |a|, as a penalty to the optimization
objective with a multiplier γ to form a three-way tradeoff
among rate, relevance, and the number of links. We show the
example in Fig. 11-12.
X. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset: Two datasets are used to evaluate (p)TADIB:
the simple AV-MNIST dataset [36], and the recent public MMFi dataset [37].
AV-MNIST Dataset: This dataset is established by aligning
the MNIST handwritten digit images with the FSDD spoken

13

digit audio samples. MNIST contains 70000 28×28 gray-scale
images of digits (0-9). FSDD contains 3000 audio recordings
of spoken digits (0-9) from different speakers, sampled at 8000
Hz. We pair each MNIST image with an FSDD audio sample
of the same digit label in (0-9). Due to the data size mismatch
between FSDD and MNIST, we introduce data augmentation
(e.g., Gaussian noise, random gain, time/frequency masking)
to the audio to ensure a one-to-one correspondence. Each entry
in this dataset consists of a normalized MNIST image and a
Mel-spectrogram representation of an augmented FSDD audio
sample with the identical label.
MM-Fi Dataset: It is a public multi-modal non-intrusive 4D
human dataset with 27 daily or rehabilitation action categories,
scales up to 152986 entries, and synchronizes 5 non-intrusive
sensing modalities including RGB-D frames, point cloud from
mmWave Radar and LiDAR, and WiFi channel state information (CSI) data.
2) Modality & Task: For AV-MNIST, we develop a semantic communication system involving 3 transmitters and 3 receivers. Every transmitter has 3 modalities while each receiver
has its specific task. We customize 3 types of modalities for
experiments on AV-MNIST. Type-A is the magnitude of the
2D Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the cropped image, where
the primal gray-scale image is cropped to a 14×14 patch of its
center. Type-B is the Mel-spectrogram representation of the
audio with 16 Mel bands, using an FFT window of 2048 and
a hop length of 256. Type-C is the vectorized random noise.
The 1-st transmitter’s observed data is X1 := (X C , X C , X A ),
the 2-nd one’s data is X2 := (X C , X A , X B ), and the 3-rd
X3 := (X A , X B , X C ). We write these vectors into a matrix
form, i.e.,
   A B C
X ,X ,X
X3
X2  = X C , X A , X B 
(30)
X1
XC, XC, XA
where we artificially add redundancy and repetitive modalities
to control and track the behavior of the optimal selection. Also,
we customize 3 types of tasks for different receivers. The first
receiver needs to distinguish the parity of handwritten digits,
which is a classification task with 2-classes. The second needs
to identify whether digits have a ring structure (0, 4, 6, 8, 9 or
not) with 6-classes. The third needs to accomplish the typical
0-9 recognition with 10-classes.
For MM-Fi, we also develop a semantic communication
system involving 4 transmitters and 3 receivers. Every transmitter has 4 modalities while each receiver has its specific
task. We customize 8 types of modalities (A-H), where AG correspond respectively to view-1 of infra-red, view-2 of
infra-red, depth, RGB, LiDAR, mmWave, and WiFi-CSI, all
of which are inherent entries of the dataset. In addition, H is
the vectorized random noise. We have a similar matrix as (30)
to represent local observations,
   B C F

X , X , X , XH
X4
X3  X G , X E , X F , X H 
 = D E F

(31)
X2  X , X , X , X H 
X1
X A, X B , X C , X H
We naturally have 3 types of tasks from MM-Fi’s data annotation. The first receiver needs to predict 3D human pose key

points with a form in R17×3 , which is regarded as a regression
task. The second needs to categorize 27 daily or rehabilitation
actions corresponding to these data entries (27 classes). Data
are collected from 4 different scenes. The third one needs to
identify from which scenario the data comes (4 classes).
3) Model: We realize a simple feed-forward network (FFN)
as a unified base model for encoders, decoders, and selectors
on both datasets. This model consists of two residual blocks.
The first block projects the input to 512 dimensions, and the
second to 256 dimensions, each followed by a ReLU activation
and layer normalization. The final layer is linear with the target
output dimension. The regularization mechanism for selection
is applied as in (27) by default.
4) Baseline: We compare the proposed TADIB against the
following representative baselines:
• Typical DL-based semantic communication (DLSC) [8]–
[10]: DLSC is designed to minimize learning risk without
rate concerns.
• VDDIB [27]: A typical DIB-based solutions for multimodal multi-task cases with full participation.
• RS-DIB: A typical DIB-based solution with random
participation in the feasible region.
• MI-DIB (TADIB-prev): Our preliminary work [1], which
uses the sub-optimal MI-based relevance metric with topk selection.
DLSC applies deterministic encoding and full participation.
It is used to compare and verify the effectiveness of IB-based
methods in rate reduction. The rest are leveraged to verify the
effectiveness of the newly introduced key variable, namely
selection, and they both apply the typical DIB objective (1) to
multiple tasks. Among all baselines, only RS-DIB can fit the
link constraints. All baselines are realized by the base model.
5) Metric: Relevance, characterized by negative cross entropy (N-CE), is set to a common metric for all tasks, which
is the logarithmic loss [22]. Top-1 Accuracy is set to the taskspecific metric for classification, while mean per joint position
error (MPJPE) and procrustes analysis-MPJPE (PA-MPJPE)
are also set to the task-specific metrics for the MM-Fi’s human
pose estimation. CE terms are easy to estimate in classification
but difficult in regression. In this regard, we adopt mean square
error (MSE) instead of CE for regression, since the two, MSE
and CE, are equivalent under the Gaussian assumption [38].
Finally, sum-rate, i.e., the total communication rate, is set to
measure the communication overhead besides (14) and (15).
6) Default Training Hyper-Parameter: Training rounds are
set to 2000 epochs, with a batch size of 20. The learning rate
of coding is set to 1e-4. The learning rate of selection is set
to 5e-5. Therefore, the learning rate ratio r between selection
and coding is set to 1/2 by default. The multiplier β is set to
1e-3. Et in (14) is set to 2 for all t ∈ T . Ek in (15) is set
to 4 for all k ∈ K. The above two are valid since for both
datasets, Et is up to 3, for AV-MNIST, Ek is up to 9, and for
MM-Fi, it is up to 12. In doing so, the corresponding limit on
the number of modality-task links is 8 for both datasets, i.e.,
|a| ≤ 8. Moreover, the output dimension of encoders is set
to 24 for AV-MNIST and 48 for MM-Fi. CR is initialized in
prior as a 24-dimensional normal distribution for AV-MNIST
and a 48-dimensional one for MM-Fi.

14

TABLE I: Performance comparison on (a) AV-MNIST and (b) MM-Fi datasets (95% confidence intervals). All metrics include sum-rate
(nat), N-CE (nat), Top-1 Acc (%), and MPJPE/PA-MPJPE (mm). Besides, t1, t2, and t3 denote tasks 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

(a)

(b)

metric/method

pTADIB

∼ (no CR)

RS-DIB

MI-DIB

VDDIB

DLSC

under limits

✓

✓

✓

✗

✗

✗

sum-rate
N-CE

166.78±0.96
-0.39±0.05

185.42±1.54
-0.72±0.05

141.76±1.08
-0.70±0.03

199.97±1.36
-0.34±0.01

190.11±1.18
-0.30±0.02

788.43±1.89
-0.10±0.01

t1:Top-1Acc
t2:Top-1Acc
t3:Top-1Acc

98.60±1.89
99.39±2.17
96.50±1.59

97.50±1.61
93.50±3.64
87.75±4.52

87.20±2.49
86.20±3.95
92.60±1.70

97.22±0.48
98.27±0.41
97.17±0.59

98.29±1.29
98.39±1.06
98.60±1.46

98.79±1.05
98.39±1.19
98.60±1.20

under limits

✓

✓

✓

✗

✗

✗

sum-rate
N-CE

311.43±2.34
-0.17±0.02

421.49±9.70
-0.40±0.04

67.78±2.12
-2.58±0.01

329.46±2.24
-0.21±0.02

447.32±1.91
-0.19±0.02

1479.38±153.43
-0.13±0.01

t1:MPJPE
t1:PA-∼
t2:Top-1Acc
t3:Top-1Acc

107.53±3.12
58.35±1.16
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00

104.91±6.41
64.96±4.74
92.75±11.24
95.25±9.94

137.72±4.80
94.90±0.89
16.01±15.93
100.00±0.00

109.12±4.32
59.03±2.26
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00

120.66±5.27
63.60±1.04
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00

99.21±5.86
56.29±2.47
100.00±0.00
100.00±0.00

(a) on AV-MNIST

TABLE II: Physical training time, the number of active links, and computational cost on (a) AV-MNIST and (b) MM-Fi datasets. Training time is
measured in seconds per epoch (s/epoch). The number of active modalitytask links is averaged over 10 independent runs. The average computational
cost is measured by FLOPs.

(b) on MM-Fi
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

-2.0

N-CE

N-CE

-1.0

-3.0

2

PoM -DIB
RS-DIB
TADIB
DLSC

-4.0
0

-2.0
-2.5
2

PoM -DIB
RS-DIB
TADIB
DLSC

-3.0
-3.5

2

10

0

10

10

2

10

Fig. 4: Rate-relevance tradeoff (sum-rate vs N-CE).
(a) on AV-MNIST

(b) on MM-Fi

-1
-2
-4

-3
-4
-5
-6

N-CE

N-CE

-2

-!0
- = 1e-4
- = 1e-3
- = 1e-2
- = 1e-1

200

-6
-8
-10

400

600

(a) AV-MNIST

method

-!0
- = 1e-4
- = 1e-3
- = 1e-2
- = 1e-1

500

1000

1500

Fig. 5: Training dynamics on information plane (sum-rate vs N-CE).

7) Platform: We conduct our experiments on a workstation
with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5090 GPU and an Intel(R)
Core(TM) i9-14900KF CPU. The experimental code is implemented using Python 3.9.23, CUDA 13.0, and PyTorch 2.2.2.
B. Numerical Results
Performance superior to baselines: In Table I, we compare
the performance of pTADIB and baselines on the two datasets.
The first three, i.e., pTADIB, pTADIB without CR, and RSDIB, are realistic. They all meet the hard constraints of links
(14) and (15). Their average number of selected modality-task
links fits the limits |a| ≤ 8. While the last three, i.e., MI-DIB,
VDDIB, and DLSC, do not meet the requirements. The number of links they use far exceeds the prescribed capacity limit,
as shown in Table II. The inference quality of pTADIB, both
in terms of the global metric N-CE and task-specific metrics

pTADIB
∼ (no CR)
MI-DIB
VDDIB

(b) MM-Fi

time

links

cost

time

links

cost

1.64
2.20
11.69
17.52

8.00
7.10
18.00
27.00

18107392
16618086
34655232
49548288

5.12
5.10
22.15
24.87

5.00
4.86
24.00
48.00

62012856
47395983
124070400
239804928

(Top-1 Acc and MPJPE/PA-MPJPE), is comparable to that
of the full versions, i.e., VDDIB and DLSC. Moreover, while
meeting (14) and (15), its communication overhead is actually
lower than that of both, demonstrating significant superiority.
Compared to RS-DIB, pTADIB shows the substantial advantage of the deployment of an optimizable selection policy.
Simple random selection always lets its corresponding coding
scheme converge to a sub-optimal point or even collapse, e.g.,
at task 2 of MM-Fi. While in pTADIB, each task performs
well. Compared to the version without CR (a constant U ),
pTADIB achieves a better tradeoff between rate and relevance
by introducing a useful CR signal. Compared to MI-DIB,
pTADIB meets the hard limits while outperforming the method
that uses a pre-defined metric, which proves the effectiveness
of the optimal relevance metric. We also observe that the
traditional DL-based semantic communication, represented by
DLSC, consumes large communication resources due to the
lack of rate control, but only achieves analogous results to IBbased solutions, pTADIB and VDDIB, in inference quality.
The sum-rate of DLSC is characterized by the sum of the
entropy of low-dimensional outputs of encoders, since it applies deterministic encoders typically rather than the stochastic
one of IB-based coding solutions, whose estimation is based
on NPEET. Also, we provide a comprehensive comparison of
training time, the number of active links, and computational
cost in Table II. We demonstrate that by optimally controlling
links, pTADIB significantly reduces training time compared
to other IB-based methods, saving up to 90% of training time
per epoch. The computational cost also reflects the advantage
of TADIB in inference speed.

15

2/1

4/1

(a)

sum-rate
N-CE

174.43 187.97 183.25 165.08 140.42 142.47 143.13
-0.72 -0.67 -0.61 -0.45 -0.92 -0.96 -0.95

(b)

sum-rate
N-CE

93.92
-0.40

72.71
-0.26

47.60
-1.81

49.31
-1.88

52.50
-1.98

53.12
-1.87

76.75
-0.31

2

0.00

0.70

0.68

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

3

0.62

0.70

0.00

2

0.00

0.68

0.70

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

Modality
Receiver 1 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

10

r = 1/16
r = 1/8
r = 1/4
r = 1/2
r = 1/1
r = 2/1
r = 4/1

-5
-10
0

500

0
-10

r = 1/16
r = 1/8
r = 1/4
r = 1/2
r = 1/1
r = 2/1
r = 4/1

-20
-30
-40

1000

1500

2000

0

500

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

1.00

0.02

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

4

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

1.00

0.00

1.00

0.00

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

Modality

0.60

0.66

0.00

2

0.00

0.56

0.68

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

Modality
Receiver 3 of MM-Fi
4

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3

1.00

1.00

0.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

Modality

Modality

Fig. 7: Converged A with CR. The average number of links: 8 for AV-MNIST,
5 for MM-Fi.
1000

1500

2000

Transmitter

3

0.80

0.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.66

0.60

1

0.00

0.18

0.18

1

2

3

3

0.82

0.00

0.00

2

0.44

0.36

0.44

1

0.30

0.32

0.28

1

2

3

Modality
Receiver 1 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

Rate relevance tradeoff: In Fig. 4(a) and (b), we explore raterelevance curves on the two datasets. Note that the better raterelevance tradeoff means that given the same communication
cost, better inference quality is achieved, or given the same
inference quality, less communicate rate is required. DLSC
does not involve a rate control variable like β. It is thereby
represented as a fixed point in the two sub-figures. Other
methods apply a range of β from 0 to 1 to control their communication rates. Then, we collect the converged value of the
“sum-rate”-“N-CE” pair at each sampled β ∈ [0, 1] to roughly
depict the tradeoff curve between the two. It is observed that
pTADIB achieves the ideal rate-relevance curve characterized
by VDDIB under hard limits by introducing a new degree of
freedom, i.e., selection. In MM-Fi, its performance is even
better than that of pTADIB (the further to the upper left, the
better), which fully matches our discussion in Section IX-A.
While RS-DIB, which lacks an update mechanism of selection,
performs much worse. It does not even work on the complex
MM-Fi, corresponding to its crash on task 2 as shown in
Table I. This contrast strongly supports the effectiveness of
the cooperative selection policy presented in Section VI-D.
Training dynamics varying with the multiplier β: Fig. 5(a)
and (b) sketch the training trajectories of pTADIB on the
information plane varying with the value of β. Each point
on any trajectory corresponds to the value of “sum-rate”-“NCE” pair at an iteration step. It means that each trajectory
corresponds to one complete training dynamics. It is observed
that each trajectory finally converges to a stationary point.
The tail of the trajectory holds denser markers than the head,
which directly reflects the convergence dynamics. Also, we
find that these trajectories converge to different points, in
which β explicitly controls the update direction. Specifically, β
decreases from 1e-1 to 0. The trajectories for these different β
values exhibit distinctly different behaviors. In (a), when β →
0, the value of rate increases monotonically. While β = 1e-4
or 1e-3, the information flow exhibits the classical behavior,
i.e., the rate value increases then decreases while the relevance

Receiver 2 of AV-MNIST

Receiver 1 of AV-MNIST

Fig. 6: Convergence of log-likelihood defined in (26) (log-likelihood vs
iteration round).

Transmitter

0

log-likelihood

log-likelihood

5

4

Transmitter

(b) on MM-Fi

20

3

Modality
Receiver 2 of MM-Fi

4

0.16

0.00

0.00

0.00

3

0.34

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

0.26

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

0.00

0.00

0.44

0.00

2

3

4

1

Modality

Receiver 3 of AV-MNIST
3

0.68

0.00

0.00

2

0.32

0.38

0.40

1

0.00

0.00

0.48

1

2

3

Modality
Receiver 2 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

(a) on AV-MNIST
10

Receiver 3 of AV-MNIST

Transmitter

1/1

0.00

Transmitter

1/2

0.74

4

0.52

0.00

0.00

0.00

3

0.26

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.12

0.00

0.00

1

0.86

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

4

1

Modality

Modality
Receiver 3 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

1/4

0.68

Transmitter

1/8

Transmitter

metric/ratio 1/16

Receiver 2 of AV-MNIST

Receiver 1 of AV-MNIST
3

Transmitter

TABLE III: Overall performance of pTADIB varying with learning rate ratio
from 1/16 to 4/1 on (a) AV-MNIST and (b) MM-Fi datasets.

4

0.00

0.28

0.00

0.00

3

0.00

1.00

0.00

0.00

2

0.36

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

0.26

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

4

1

Modality

Fig. 8: Converged A without CR. The average number of links: 7.1 for AVMNIST, 4.86 for MM-Fi.

monotonically increases, which is previously indicated in [23],
[39]. If we proceed to pose a greater rate penalty by increasing
β, then the rate value of the trajectory will degenerate into a
monotonically decreasing state. In Fig. 5(b), we also observe
a similar phenomenon but with more irregular oscillations. It
shows that different values of β correspond to different types
of training dynamics. The phenomena are basically consistent
with the pioneering work [23]. This further illustrates that our
extended IB solution, i.e., pTADIB, involving selection as a
new variable to tackle hard limits, still fully inherits the good
properties of IB, achieving effective rate-relevance tradeoff.
Convergence of iterative policy update and parameter
sensitivity analysis: In the rest of this section, we elaborate
on the behaviors of the optimizable selection policy. In Fig.
6(a)-(b), we detail the convergence of the log-likelihood (26),
controlled by the learning rate ratio r, which is the ratio
between the learning rate of selection policy update and
semantic coding. It is observed that all curves start from a
low negative value, then grow to a positive value, and finally
drop to zero if the ratio is sufficiently large, or converge to a
certain positive value. The rapid growth in the early stage of

16

0.05

2

0.00

0.50

0.25

3

3

0.85

0.60

0.15

2

0.20

0.80

0.50

0.00

0.05

0.05

1

2

3

3

0.00

0.10

0.00

2

0.00

0.75

0.40

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

3

0.95

0.90

0.05

2

0.00

0.80

0.50

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

3

0.65

0.35

0.00

2

0.00

0.60

0.70

1

0.00

0.05

0.05

1

2

3

3

0.71

0.81

0.00

2

0.00

0.74

0.65

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

0.00

0.05

0.05

1

2

3

3

0.80

0.80

0.00

2

0.00

0.65

0.80

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

3

0.61

0.61

0.00

2

0.00

0.65

0.74

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

1

3

3

0.80

0.50

0.10

2

0.10

0.70

0.40

0.00

0.10

0.10

1

2

3

3

0.95

0.95

0.00

2

0.10

0.75

0.45

1

0.00

0.05

0.05

1

2

3

3

0.65

0.75

0.00

2

0.00

0.65

0.60

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

3

0.61

0.65

0.00

2

0.00

0.48

0.74

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

1

1

Modality

0.10

0.05

0.05

3 0.10

0.10

0.05

0.15

3 0.30

0.30

0.30

0.25

2 0.25

0.15

0.25

0.15

2 0.20

0.20

0.40

0.30

2 0.00

0.05

0.20

0.15

1 0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

1 0.30

0.10

0.30

0.25

1 0.25

0.05

0.25

0.10

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.75

1.00

0.45

0.35

2 0.05

0.00

0.05

0.00

2 0.85

0.20

1.00

0.15

2 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.65

0.40

0.15

0.10

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.60

1.00

0.40

0.25

2 0.05

0.00

0.05

0.00

2 0.95

0.00

0.95

0.00

2 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.85

0.20

0.10

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.95

1.00

0.20

0.00

2 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2 0.95

0.00

1.00

0.05

2 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 1.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 1.00

1.00

0.00

0.00

2 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2 1.00

0.00

1.00

0.00

2 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 1.00

0.03

0.00

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 120

Modality

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 120

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 240

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 240

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 360

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 2000

1

Transmitter

0.30

Transmitter

Transmitter

0.30

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 360

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 2000

Modality

0.15

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 240

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 360

1

3 0.10

Receiver 3 at iteration 0
4 0.15

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 120

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 240

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 2000

Transmitter

Transmitter

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 2000

Modality

2

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 120

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 360

Transmitter

Transmitter

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 360

1

1

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 240

Transmitter

Transmitter

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 240

1

0.25

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 120

Transmitter

Transmitter

1

0.30

0.00

Transmitter

0.15

2

0.10

1

0.05

Transmitter

0.40

1

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 120

0.20

0.05

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 360

Transmitter

3

0.25

0.30

Receiver 2 at iteration 0
4 0.00

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 2000

Modality

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 2000

Transmitter

3

0.25

0.15

0.10

Transmitter

2

0.30

1

2

0.20

Transmitter

1

0.35

0.05

0.15

Transmitter

0.00

0.70

0.55

4 0.20

Transmitter

0.10

0.45

0.70

Transmitter

0.10

1

2

3

Transmitter

0.10

0.35

Transmitter

0.55

0.20

Receiver 1 at iteration 0

Transmitter

0.25

0.40

Transmitter

2

3

Transmitter

0.25

Transmitter

0.35

Transmitter

0.35

Receiver 3 at iteration 0

Transmitter

3

Receiver 2 at iteration 0

Transmitter

Transmitter

Receiver 1 at iteration 0

Modality

Fig. 9: Convergence of randomized selection A on AV-MNIST. Corresponding
rate: 165.08; N-CE: -0.45. The average number of links (converged): 8.

Fig. 10: Convergence of randomized selection A on MM-Fi. Corresponding
rate: 78.17; N-CE: -0.35. The average number of links (converged): 5.

training shows the effectiveness of policy gradient. It shows
that the update of the cooperative selection policy matches
the overall optimization goal. The converged selection policies
also exhibit different characteristics with the differences in
ratios. If the log-likelihood converges to zero, a deterministic
policy PA|U conditioned on CR is obtained. This is directly
derived from (26) to let log p(a|u) = 0. This also demonstrates
that if this term converges to a positive value, we have a
stochastic version with CR. Both types of policies work well
as shown in Table III. Additionally, we illustrate that there
exists an optimal ratio r, which is 1/2 on AV-MNIST and 1/8
on MM-Fi. We also find that using random selection at a ratio
of 4/1 can achieve nearly optimal inference quality on MMFi. This reveals the highly nonlinear influence of the learning
rate ratio on optimality. In which, the value of N-CE always

converges to around -0.3 or -1.9 while the value of sum-rate
always converges to around 80 or 50 on MM-Fi, which means
that the selection and its corresponding coding jump between
the optimal solution and the sub-optimal one due to different
learning rate ratios. The convergence of the log-likelihood only
partially indicates selection convergence, as this log-likelihood
also approaches zero when the loss value vanishes for every
type of selection. Secondly, we present the convergence of the
selection and the favorable properties it exhibits.
The benifit of CR for policy convergence: In the preceding
Table I, we have compared the performance of pTADIB with
and without CR. Here, we further illustrate the benefit of CR
on the convergence of the optimizable selection policy. In the
rest of this paper, the selection vector a is visualized as a
stack of color blocks. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 7, each

17

0.40

2

0.00

0.10

0.05

3

3

0.30

0.05

0.45

2

0.05

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.05

0.10

1

2

3

3

0.50

0.05

0.00

2

0.00

0.35

0.00

0.05

0.05

0.05

1

2

3

3

0.60

0.10

0.00

2

0.05

0.10

0.00

1

0.05

0.10

0.10

1

2

3

3

0.50

0.00

0.10

2

0.00

0.35

0.00

1

0.05

0.05

0.05

1

2

3

3

0.61

0.03

0.00

2

0.23

0.29

0.13

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

0.05

0.10

0.10

1

2

3

3

0.90

0.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.15

0.00

1

0.05

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

3

0.81

0.00

0.03

2

0.06

0.13

0.03

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

1

3

3

0.15

0.20

0.10

2

0.30

0.15

0.15

0.25

0.10

0.25

1

2

3

3

0.25

0.10

0.05

2

0.00

0.55

0.05

1

0.10

0.00

0.10

1

2

3

3

0.40

0.00

0.00

2

0.05

0.45

0.05

1

0.05

0.05

0.10

1

2

3

3

0.90

0.00

0.00

2

0.03

0.13

0.03

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

1

1

Modality

0.35

0.30

0.15

3 0.30

0.35

0.35

0.25

3 0.35

0.20

0.20

0.25

2 0.30

0.25

0.30

0.35

2 0.40

0.20

0.30

0.30

2 0.35

0.15

0.50

0.40

1 0.50

0.20

0.45

0.55

1 0.25

0.25

0.35

0.30

1 0.50

0.30

0.55

0.35

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

4 0.05

0.05

0.30

0.35

4 0.00

0.05

0.05

0.05

4 0.00

0.10

0.10

0.00

3 0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

3 0.10

0.10

0.15

0.15

3 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

2 0.10

0.05

0.10

0.15

2 0.30

0.20

0.45

0.50

2 0.20

0.25

0.20

0.15

1 0.10

0.05

0.15

0.15

1 0.10

0.00

0.05

0.05

1 0.15

0.20

0.25

0.20

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

4 0.15

0.00

0.35

0.40

4 0.05

0.05

0.30

0.35

4 0.00

0.05

0.10

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.05

0.00

0.00

0.05

3 0.10

0.10

0.05

0.10

2 0.05

0.00

0.00

0.05

2 0.15

0.00

0.05

0.00

2 0.25

0.15

0.30

0.10

1 0.05

0.00

0.00

0.05

1 0.05

0.10

0.10

0.05

1 0.00

0.00

0.10

0.05

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

4 0.10

0.00

0.45

0.30

4 0.05

0.10

0.55

0.20

4 0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.05

0.10

0.05

0.05

3 0.10

0.00

0.00

0.05

2 0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

2 0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

2 0.05

0.85

0.05

0.05

1 0.05

0.05

0.05

0.10

1 0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

4 0.35

0.03

0.16

0.10

4 0.90

0.03

0.00

0.00

4 0.06

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3 0.00

0.00

0.03

0.03

2 0.00

0.16

0.16

0.00

2 0.03

0.06

0.00

0.00

2 0.03

0.87

0.06

0.00

1 0.03

0.03

0.03

0.03

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1 0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 120

Modality

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 120

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 240

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 240

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 360

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 2000

1

Transmitter

0.40

Transmitter

Transmitter

0.40

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 360

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 2000

Modality

0.20

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 240

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 360

1

3 0.30

Receiver 3 at iteration 0
4 0.20

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 120

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 240

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 2000

Transmitter

Transmitter

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 2000

Modality

2

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 120

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 360

Transmitter

Transmitter

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 360

1

1

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 240

Transmitter

Transmitter

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 240

1

0.20

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 120

Transmitter

Transmitter

1

0.30

0.20

Transmitter

0.10

2

0.45

1

0.30

Transmitter

0.35

1

Modality
Receiver 1 at iteration 120

0.20

0.10

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 360

Transmitter

3

0.15

0.15

Receiver 2 at iteration 0
4 0.05

Modality
Receiver 2 at iteration 2000

Modality

Modality
Receiver 3 at iteration 2000

Transmitter

3

0.05

0.25

0.15

Transmitter

2

0.15

1

2

0.30

Transmitter

1

0.45

0.60

0.20

Transmitter

0.20

0.25

0.40

4 0.15

Transmitter

0.30

0.45

0.65

Transmitter

0.20

1

2

3

Transmitter

0.25

0.45

Transmitter

0.20

0.40

Receiver 1 at iteration 0

Transmitter

0.20

0.40

Transmitter

2

3

Transmitter

0.35

Transmitter

0.35

Transmitter

0.40

Receiver 3 at iteration 0

Transmitter

3

Receiver 2 at iteration 0

Transmitter

Transmitter

Receiver 1 at iteration 0

Modality

Fig. 11: Convergence of A with the sparse prior on AV-MNIST. Corresponding rate: 135.71; N-CE: -0.70. The average number of links (converged): 3.44.

Fig. 12: Convergence of A with the sparse prior on MM-Fi. Corresponding
rate: 75.99; N-CE: -0.35. The average number of links (converged): 3.15.

row, presenting an iteration round, maintains 3 chunks. Each
chunk represents all available modalities from transmitters for
a specific task of a receiver. The value of color coding for
a modality corresponds to the marginal probability mass of
selecting that modality for the specific task. Hence, the value
range is from 0 to 1. With the definition of A in Section VI-B,
we can equivalently consider each row as corresponding to a
“mixed” selection ā in the expectation sense, i.e., ā := E[A].
Combining Fig. 7 and 8, we compare the convergence of the
optimizable selection with and without CR. It is observed
that with CR, the selection converges to a stable distribution
where the non-zero masses are high up to 1, indicating the
low uncertainty of selection. While without CR, the selection
converges to a relatively flat distribution, in which the average
of non-zero mass is less than 0.5, indicating high uncertainty.

Also, note that the number of links selected without CR is
less than the limit 8, while with CR, it exactly meets the
limit. This means that without CR, the selection policy tends
to be conservative to avoid violating the hard limits. The
both drawbacks of high uncertainty and conservative selection
stem from the lack of coordination among devices, which also
leads to sub-optimal performance of the version without CR
as shown in Table I.
Visualization of policy convergence: The convergence of the
optimizable selection is represented in Figs. 9 and 10. The
two are under hard limits with Et = 2 and Ek = 4. Starting
from a random initial distribution, ā gradually converges to a
stationary distribution. Although we point out in the preceding
that PA|U could converge to a deterministic policy at the
default ratio 1/2, due to the inherent randomness of U in

18

1.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

3

1.00

1.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

0.02

0.02

0.98

0.00

1

2

3

4

3

1.00

1.00

0.00

2

0.00

1.00

0.00

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

Modality
Receiver 2 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

Transmitter

Modality
Receiver 1 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

1.00

Receiver 3 of AV-MNIST

4

1.00

0.00

1.00

0.00

3

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

Modality

Modality
Receiver 3 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

3

Receiver 2 of AV-MNIST

Transmitter

Transmitter

Receiver 1 of AV-MNIST

4

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3

0.00

1.00

1.00

0.00

2

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1

2

3

4

Modality

Modality

Fig. 13: Converged A with no limits at β=1e-3. For AV-MNIST, rate: 172.27;
N-CE: -0.15. For MM-Fi, rate: 78.17; N-CE: -0.36.

1.00

1.00

2

1.00

1.00

1.00

1

0.98

0.66

1.00

1

2

3

3

1.00

1.00

1.00

2

1.00

1.00

1.00

1

0.98

0.64

1.00

1

2

3

4

0.00

0.00

0.98

0.00

3

0.92

1.00

1.00

0.94

2

1.00

0.96

0.94

0.96

1

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

2

3

4

1

Modality

3

1.00

1.00

1.00

2

1.00

1.00

1.00

1

1.00

0.64

1.00

1

2

3

Modality
Receiver 2 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

Transmitter

Modality
Receiver 1 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

1.00

Receiver 3 of AV-MNIST

4

0.00

0.00

0.68

0.00

3

0.84

0.88

0.88

0.86

2

0.98

0.94

0.94

0.90

1

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

2

3

4

1

Modality

Modality
Receiver 3 of MM-Fi

Transmitter

3

Receiver 2 of AV-MNIST

Transmitter

Transmitter

Receiver 1 of AV-MNIST

4

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.00

3

0.86

0.98

1.00

0.92

2

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.98

2

3

4

1

Modality

Fig. 14: Converged A with no limits at β → 0. For AV-MNIST, rate: 1690.59;
N-CE: -0.08. For MM-Fi, rate: 4592.59; N-CE: -0.14.

training, this leads to the non-degenerate marginal PA . As
shown in Fig. 9, the converged selection is mixed, namely,
every possible selection has a mass lower than 1. Also, we can
easily measure the effectiveness of the converged selection on
AV-MNIST. Recall the setting in (30), i.e.,
 A B C
X ,X ,X
X C , X A , X B 
(32)
XC, XC, XA
where X A corresponds to image information, X B corresponds
to audio information, and finally X C corresponds to independent noises. We can easily confirm that the effective modalities
are X A and X B . This exactly corresponds to the convergent
selection expectation, i.e., the last row of Fig. 9, which drops
all noise terms X C . This is in line with our expectations
and once again strongly illustrates the effectiveness of the
selection optimization. In Fig. 10, a similar phenomenon is
observed, but at this time, A is deterministic and degenerate:
the probability mass of choosing these modalities equals
1. Besides, it is worth noticing that in every iteration, the
expected selection number (the sum of type masses) is 8

for AV-MNIST, which exactly falls at the boundary of our
limits. In contrast, the expected value of MM-Fi is less than
8 (converging to 5), which reveals the high data redundancy
of the real dataset MM-Fi.
Three way tradeoff among rate, relevance, and the number
of modality-task links: Fig. 11 and 12 allow full participation
and adopt the sparse prior discussed in Remark 8. They depict
the convergence of the optimizable selection, albeit with soft
link limits. It can be verified from the expected values of the
first line, i.e., the initial stage, that the AV-MNIST expected
value is 8.4 and the MM-Fi expected value is 14.35, both
of which are greater than the 8 we set. However, the modal
selection that eventually converges to is highly sparse with
the AV-MNIST expected value 3.44 and the MM-Fi expected
value 3.15, which is due to the application of the sparse
regularization with γ = 0.1. This indicates that by introducing
the additional multiplier γ, the rate-relevance tradeoff under
modality-aware constraints can be successfully extended to a
three-way tradeoff of rate-relevance-selection, thereby allowing for intellicise semantic communication networking.
Verification of optimal selection at no physical limits: We
now verify our statement in Remark 7, which indicates that
at β > 0, even when there exist no physical constraints, the
optimal selection does not degrade into full participation. This
claim is empirically demonstrated as illustrated in Fig. 1314. In this case, a few modalities that are beneficial for task
inference are selected, all the useless noise modalities are not
included. In contrast, if we set β → 0 as illustrated in Fig. 14,
free communication and unlimited computing power make the
convergence selection approach full participation.
XI. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposes the TADIB framework for multi-modal
multi-task semantic communication, which defines a new
modality-task score and introduces a new scheme to jointly
optimize modality selection alongside semantic coding based
on DIB theory. By transforming discrete selection into a
probabilistic form and leveraging common randomness for
cross-device coordination, this distributed framework achieves
a flexible modality-aware rate-relevance tradeoff. It can reduce
the overhead of unnecessary transmission and computation of
redundant data significantly, while maintaining high inference
quality under physical limits. Besides theoretical guarantees,
extensive experimental results also illustrate the effectiveness
of TADIB across different tasks and datasets.
A PPENDIX A
P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 AND P ROPOSITION 2
Proof of Theorem 1. By introducing an auxiliary U matching
Definition 3, we directly decompose LpTA [υp , f ] as
h



i
EPA LTA [υp , f ] = EPU EPA|U LTA [υp , f ]
= EPU

T
hX


i
EPAk,t |U H(Yt |Ak,t ◦ Zt ) + β⟨Ak,t , LIB,t ⟩ ,

t=1

which is our desired result.

(33)

19

Proof of Proposition 2. For (i), we have
Z
q(y|z)
I(Z; Y ) ≥ dydzp(y, z) log
p(y)
Z
Z
= dydzp(y, z) log q(y|z) − dyp(y) log p(y)
= H(Y ) − Ez∼PZ [H(PY |Z , QY |Z )],
(34)
where the first inequality holds due to the non-negativity of
DKL (·∥·), i.e.,
Z
p(y|z)
dzdy = EPZ [DKL (PY |Z ∥QY |Z )] ≥ 0.
p(z)p(y|z)log
q(y|z)
(35)
Note that H(Y |Z) = H(Y ) − I(Y ; Z). We obtain the result
m
stated in (i) by replacing Z with Zk,t
and Y with Yt .
For (ii), following the preceding inequality (34), we replace
Z with Ak,t ◦ Zt and Y with yt to yield
H(Yt |Ak,t ◦ Zt ) ≤ EPAk,t ◦Zt [H(PYt |Ak,t ◦Zt , QYt |Ak,t ◦Zt )].
(36)
We can finally obtain the result stated in (ii) by taking the law
of the unconscious statistician to replace the expectation over
Ak,t ◦ Zt with the expectation over Zt |Ak,t .
A PPENDIX B
P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
We first give a technical lemma, then we prove Theorem 2.
Lemma 1. If PA is Dirac and admits the constraint, then
PA ∈ PA .
Proof of Theorem 2. In (28), the almost everywhere convergence holds due to the strong law of large numbers, and the
inequality holds due to Proposition 2. In (29), the inequality
can be derived analogously to [23, Lemma 1].
In the rest of the proof, we show that the last equality of
(29) always holds. To show minυp ,f LpTA = minυ,f,g LTA , we
only need to show minPA EPA [R(A)] = mina R(a) due to
the equivalence expressed in (3).
We first prove minPA EPA [R(A)] ≤ minPA EPA [R(A)]
and then prove minPA EPA [R(A)] ≥ mina R(a).
The minimizer of R(a) can induce its corresponding optimal selection a⋆ . We can construct a Dirac distribution at a⋆ ,
⋆
⋆
denoted as PeA
. We claim PeA
∈ PA due to Lemma 1. This
⋆
shows that R(a ) is a special case of EPA [R(A)] by taking
⋆
⋆
⋆
PA = PeA
. Let PA
be optimal over PA and PeA
may not be
⋆
⋆
⋆
identical to PA , we claim EPA [R(A)] ≤ R(a ). Also, with
a certain 1 ≥ p ≥ 0,
PA

= pR(a⋆ ) + (1 − p)R(a′ )

(37)

⋆
where for simplicity, we consider a case that PA
with its
⋆
′
support at a and a only. Then the following holds
′

In this case, we can directly have pV W (v, w) = pV (v)pW (w),
which implies the independence between V and W . Extending
the
QT above
QK conclusion to the Dirac PA , it follows that PA =
, which is in PA with an arbitrary U if it is
t=1
k=1 PA(k)
k,t
feasible.
A PPENDIX C
P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3
Proof. If we assume that one selection M(T ) is feasible that
M(T ) ∈ A and is optimal with |M(T )| = C ⋆ where C ⋆ ≤
KM T is the link limit that we take equality on all constraints
|Mk | = Ek and |Kt | = Et , then we trivially have the result.
Otherwise, we set M(T ) ∈ A as the optimal selection
with |M(T )| = C < C ⋆ . In the rest, we show that we
can always find a selection with |M(T )| = C + 1 that is
optimal. Recursively, we can have the extended version in A
with |M(T )| = C ⋆ by adding the missing links to obtain the
claimed result.
We now consider an additional link (k ′ , m′ , t′ ) that is not
in aprev := M(T ), and set anew := aprev ∪ {(k ′ , m′ , t′ )}. Then,
LTA [υ(anew ), f ] = LTA [υ(aprev ), f ]
+ H(Yt′ |ZM(t′ )∪{(k′ ,m′ ,t′ )} ) − H(Yt′ |ZM(t′ ) )

⋆

EPA⋆ [R(A)] − R(a ) = (1 − p)(R(a ) − R(a )) ≥ 0. (38)
This also holds for general supports that have finite counts. It
follows that EPA⋆ [R(A)] ≥ R(a⋆ ).

(40)

′
′
′
+ β(H(Yt′ |Zkm′ ,t′ ) + I(Xkm′ ; Zkm′ ,t′ )).
′

Set fkm′ (·; t′ ) as a constant (vector) encoder for (k ′ , m′ , t′ ) to
eliminate the information dependence on the new link, i.e.,
H(Yt′ |ZM(t′ )∪{(k′ ,m′ ,t′ )} ) − H(Yt′ |ZM(t′ ) ) = 0,

(41)

and at β = 0,
′

′

′

β(H(Yt′ |Zkm′ ,t′ ) + I(Xkm′ ; Zkm′ ,t′ )) = 0,

(42)

LTA [υ(anew ), f ′ ] = LTA [υ(aprev ), f ],

(43)

That is,
′
where f is an extended version of f with fkm′ (·; t′ ) ≡ c. We
now choose f to be the minimizer of LTA [υ(aprev ), f ] as f ⋆ ,

′

then note that aprev is assumed to be optimal, we have
min LTA [υ(a), f ] = min LTA [υ(aprev ), f ]
f,a

f

= LTA [υ(aprev ), f ⋆ ]
= LTA [υ(anew ), f ⋆,′ ]

EPA⋆ [R(A)] = min EPA [R(A)]

⋆

Proof of Lemma 1. Let random variables V, W follow a joint
distribution PV W , which is Dirac at (v0 , w0 ), i.e., its probability mass function satisfies
(
1 if (v, w) = (v0 , w0 ),
(39)
pV W (v, w) =
0 else.

(44)

≥ min LTA [υ(anew ), f ]
f

≥ min LTA [υ(a), f ].
f,a

This shows that the extended selection anew is also optimal
satisfying minf LTA [υ(anew ), f ] = minf,a LTA [υ(a), f ].
We repeat the above construction to achieve the extended
selection anew at the capacity limit with |M(T )| = C ⋆ to
derive the result.

20

R EFERENCES
[1] C. Peng, Y. Zhou, R. Wang, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, and G. Shi, “Multi-user
information bottleneck for semantic-aware communication,” in ICC 2025
- IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2025.
[2] Y. Xiao, G. Shi, and P. Zhang, “Towards agentic AI networking in 6G: A
generative foundation model-as-agent approach,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 63, no. 9, September 2025.
[3] G. Shi, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, and X. Xie, “From semantic communication to
semantic-aware networking: Model, architecture, and open problems,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 44–50, 2021.
[4] Y. Xiao, Z. Sun, G. Shi, and D. Niyato, “Imitation learning-based
implicit semantic-aware communication networks: Multi-layer representation and collaborative reasoning,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 639–658, 2022.
[5] S. Wang, J. Dai, Z. Liang, K. Niu, Z. Si, C. Dong, X. Qin, and P. Zhang,
“Wireless deep video semantic transmission,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 214–229, 2023.
[6] J. Xu, B. Ai, W. Chen, A. Yang, P. Sun, and M. Rodrigues, “Wireless
image transmission using deep source channel coding with attention
modules,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 2315–2328, 2022.
[7] Z. Weng et al., “Deep learning enabled semantic communications
with speech recognition and synthesis,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 6227–6240, 2023.
[8] H. Xie, Z. Qin, X. Tao, and K. B. Letaief, “Task-oriented multiuser semantic communications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2584–2597, 2022.
[9] G. He, S. Cui, Y. Dai, and T. Jiang, “Learning task-oriented channel allocation for multi-agent communication,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 71, no. 11, pp. 12 016–12 029, 2022.
[10] G. Zhang, Q. Hu, Z. Qin, Y. Cai, G. Yu, and X. Tao, “A unified
multi-task semantic communication system for multimodal data,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 72, no. 7, pp. 4101–4116, 2024.
[11] M. Gong et al., “Compression before fusion: Broadcast semantic communication system for heterogeneous tasks,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 19 428–19 443, 2024.
[12] A. H. Razlighi, M. H. Tillmann, E. Beck, C. Bockelmann, and A. Dekorsy, “Cooperative and collaborative multi-task semantic communication
for distributed sources,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02150, 2024.
[13] H. Gao, G. Yu, Y. He, and Y. Liu, “Semantic feature scheduling and
rate control in multi-modal distributed network,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 19 199–19 214, 2024.
[14] Z. Lu, “A theory of multimodal learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[15] X. Peng, Y. Wei, A. Deng, D. Wang, and D. Hu, “Balanced multimodal
learning via on-the-fly gradient modulation,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2022,
pp. 8238–8247.
[16] J. Shao, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Learning task-oriented communication
for edge inference: An information bottleneck approach,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 197–211, 2021.
[17] S. Xie, S. Ma et al., “Robust information bottleneck for task-oriented
communication with digital modulation,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 2577–2591, 2023.
[18] H. Li, J. Shao, H. He, S. Song, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, “Tackling
distribution shifts in task-oriented communication with information
bottleneck,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09514, 2024.
[19] Y. He, G. Yu, and Y. Cai, “Rate-adaptive coding mechanism for
semantic communications with multi-modal data,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications, vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 1385–1400, 2024.
[20] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck
method,” arXiv preprint physics/0004057, 2000.
[21] Z. Goldfeld and Y. Polyanskiy, “The information bottleneck problem and
its applications in machine learning,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Information Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 19–38, 2020.
[22] A. Zaidi, I. Estella-Aguerri, and S. Shamai, “On the information
bottleneck problems: Models, connections, applications and information
theoretic views,” Entropy, vol. 22, no. 2, p. 151, 2020.
[23] I. E. Aguerri and A. Zaidi, “Distributed variational representation learning,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 120–138, 2019.
[24] D. Slepian and J. Wolf, “Noiseless coding of correlated information
sources,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 19, no. 4, pp.
471–480, 1973.

[25] T. A. Courtade and T. Weissman, “Multiterminal source coding under
logarithmic loss,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 60,
no. 1, pp. 740–761, 2014.
[26] A. A. Alemi et al., “Deep variational information bottleneck,” in 5th
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017,
Toulon, France, 2017. OpenReview.net, 2017.
[27] J. Shao, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Task-oriented communication for
multidevice cooperative edge inference,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 73–87, 2022.
[28] S. Mai, Y. Zeng, and H. Hu, “Multimodal information bottleneck:
Learning minimal sufficient unimodal and multimodal representations,”
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 4121–4134, 2023.
[29] D. Gündüz, Z. Qin, I. E. Aguerri et al., “Beyond transmitting bits:
Context, semantics, and task-oriented communications,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 5–41, 2022.
[30] P. W. Cuff et al., “Coordination capacity,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 4181–4206, 2010.
[31] P. Cheng, W. Hao, S. Dai, J. Liu, Z. Gan, and L. Carin, “Club: A contrastive log-ratio upper bound of mutual information,” in International
conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2020, pp. 1779–1788.
[32] R. S. Sutton, D. McAllester, S. Singh, and Y. Mansour, “Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 12, 1999.
[33] D. E. Rumelhart et al., “Learning representations by back-propagating
errors,” nature, vol. 323, no. 6088, pp. 533–536, 1986.
[34] R. Vershynin, High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science. Cambridge university press, 2018, vol. 47.
[35] F. Clarke, Functional analysis, calculus of variations and optimal
control. Springer, 2013, vol. 264.
[36] V. Vielzeuf, A. Lechervy, S. Pateux, and F. Jurie, “Centralnet: a multilayer approach for multimodal fusion,” in Proceedings of the European
conference on computer vision (ECCV) workshops, 2018, pp. 0–0.
[37] J. Yang et al., “Mm-fi: Multi-modal non-intrusive 4d human dataset for
versatile wireless sensing,” in NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA,
December 10 - 16, 2023, 2023.
[38] S. Yu, X. Yu, S. Løkse, R. Jenssen, and J. C. Prı́ncipe, “Cauchy-schwarz
divergence information bottleneck for regression,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna,
Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net, 2024.
[39] N. Tishby and N. Zaslavsky, “Deep learning and the information
bottleneck principle,” in 2015 ieee information theory workshop (itw).
Ieee, 2015, pp. 1–5.

