1

Contrastive Learning and Adversarial
Disentanglement for Privacy-Aware Task-Oriented
Semantic Communication

arXiv:2410.22784v3 [cs.LG] 2 Jul 2025

Omar Erak, Member, IEEE, Omar Alhussein, Senior Member, IEEE, Wen Tong, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Task-oriented semantic communication systems
have emerged as a promising approach to achieving efficient
and intelligent data transmission in next-generation networks,
where only information relevant to a specific task is communicated. This is particularly important in 6G-enabled Internet of
Things (6G-IoT) scenarios, where bandwidth constraints, latency
requirements, and data privacy are critical. However, existing
methods struggle to fully disentangle task-relevant and taskirrelevant information, leading to privacy concerns and suboptimal performance. To address this, we propose an informationbottleneck inspired method, named CLAD (contrastive learning
and adversarial disentanglement). CLAD utilizes contrastive
learning to effectively capture task-relevant features while employing adversarial disentanglement to discard task-irrelevant
information. Additionally, due to the absence of reliable and
reproducible methods to quantify the minimality of encoded
feature vectors, we introduce the Information Retention Index
(IRI), a comparative metric used as a proxy for the mutual
information between the encoded features and the input. The
IRI reflects how minimal and informative the representation is,
making it highly relevant for privacy-preserving and bandwidthefficient 6G-IoT systems. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
CLAD outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in terms of semantic
extraction, task performance, privacy preservation, and IRI,
making it a promising building block for responsible, efficient
and trustworthy 6G-IoT services.
Index Terms—Contrastive learning, disentangled representation learning, information-bottleneck, semantic communication,
task-oriented communication.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In conventional communication systems, the primary objective has been to ensure reliable transmission of data, focusing
on delivering bit sequences across noisy channels without
considering the meaning, context, or purpose of the data being
transmitted. Shannon’s mathematical theory of communication
focuses on optimizing metrics such as data rate, error rate,
and bandwidth efficiency, whilst being agnostic to the ultimate
purpose and relevance of the transmitted information [1]. This
approach has been widely successful and effective for general communication needs thus far. However, next-generation
communication systems, beginning with 6G, require more
intelligent and task-aware communication methods to support
a wide range of real-time and mission-critical Internet of
Things (IoT) applications [2], [3], such as computer vision
Omar Erak and Omar Alhussein are with the KU 6G Research Center,
Department of Computer Science, Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, UAE (email: omarerak@ieee.org, omar.alhussein@ku.ac.ae).
Wen Tong is with the Huawei Wireless Research, Wireless Advanced
System and Competency Centre, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd., Ottawa, ON
K2K 3J1, Canada, (e-mail: tongwen@huawei.com).

[4], autonomous driving [5], extended reality (XR) [6], and
generative artificial intelligence (AI) [7].
As we move towards these advanced systems, there is a
growing recognition that communication should not merely
be about transmitting raw data, but about understanding the
underlying meaning and purpose of the data. This shift towards
task-oriented semantic communication represents a fundamental change in the design of communication networks [8],
[9]. Instead of focusing solely on the accurate and efficient
transmission of bits, these new approaches aim to ensure that
the information most relevant to the specific task or decisionmaking process is prioritized and delivered with minimal
delay and overhead. This is especially critical in 6G-IoT
settings, where devices operate under tight bandwidth, latency,
and energy constraints, and where privacy and reliability are
essential. For example, in a smart city environment [10],
rather than transmitting all sensor data from traffic cameras,
task-oriented communication focuses on sending only the
information necessary to identify and respond to potential
hazards or optimize traffic flow in real time.
With the growing success and popularity of deep learning
(DL) in various wireless communication applications [11],
[12], many emerging task-oriented communication systems
have adopted DL approaches to encode task-relevant information to improve task performance and efficiency of the
communication system [13]–[15]. Nevertheless, most proposed schemes do not focus on quantifying or benchmarking
the amount of information that the encoded features retain
about the input, primarily due to the computational difficulty
of estimating mutual information and the lack of a unified
methodology that provides fair and reproducible results. This
omission is critical, particularly in IoT and edge computing
scenarios, where understanding how much information is kept
and whether it is necessary or private has direct implications
on trustworthiness, data security, and system interpretability.
Furthermore, most current approaches rely on maximizing
mutual information between the encoded features and the
target using variational approximations based on the crossentropy loss [13], [15], [16]. However, deriving a maximization for the mutual information between the encoded feature
vector and the targets based on contrastive learning [17]
remains unexplored for task-oriented communication systems.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we develop
a task-oriented communication system based on contrastive
learning [17] and disentangled representation learning [18],
and we devise a new metric to compute comparative values for
a proxy of mutual information between the encoded features
and the inputs across different systems, rather than computing

2

the exact mutual information. More specifically, our major
contributions are as follows:
• We derive a lower bound for the mutual information
between the encoded features and the target using contrastive learning principles. We show that the contrastive
learning based lower bound improves task accuracy and
performance compared to traditional cross-entropy based
mutual information approximations;
• We propose a systematic training methodology based
on an innovative loss function, designed to extract taskirrelevant information through reconstruction losses while
disentangling it from task-relevant features using adversarial methods. This enables the system to prioritize the
transmission of task-relevant features while minimizing
communication overhead and reducing unnecessary information transmission, thus enhancing privacy;
• To address the current limitation of lacking a reliable
and unified approach for estimating the mutual information between the encoded features and input data, we
introduce a new metric named the Information Retention
Index (IRI), which serves as a proxy for the mutual
information. This metric compares the informativeness
and minimality of the encoded features across various
task-oriented communication methods, providing deeper
insights into system behavior and enabling a more rigorous comparison of their performance;
• We evaluate our proposed task-oriented communication
system in diverse channel conditions. It is tested against
several existing task-oriented communication methods,
demonstrating improved task performance, enhanced privacy awareness, and reduced amount of irrelevant information across a wide range of transmission scenarios.
II. R ELATED W ORK
DL-based communication systems have shown success in
recent years. DeepJSCC (Deep Joint Source-Channel Coding)
is a recent advancement in the field of wireless communication
that utilizes deep learning to jointly optimize source and
channel coding, which are traditionally treated as separate
tasks [14]. Unlike conventional methods that rely on separate
compression and error-correction codes, DeepJSCC uses neural networks to directly map source data to channel symbols,
allowing for an end-to-end optimization of the communication
system. DeepJSCC can be trained on a classification task
by minimizing the cross-entropy loss, ensuring task-specific
performance; however, it does not inherently ensure that only
task-relevant features are transmitted.
Building on that, Shao et al. [13] proposed a task-oriented
communication system for edge inference by leveraging the information bottleneck (IB) theory [19], and variational approximations [16] to balance a trade-off between the minimality of
the transmitted feature vector and the task performance. Their
results demonstrate improved latency and classification accuracy. Another work focuses on improving the aforementioned
IB framework for task-oriented communication systems by
introducing an information bottleneck framework that ensures
robustness to varying channel conditions [15].

Wang et al. [20] formulate a privacy-utility trade-off to
develop an IB-based privacy-preserving task-oriented communication system against model inversion attacks [21]. This is
achieved by striking a balance between the traditional IBbased loss functions similar to the work discussed above and a
mean squared error (MSE) based term that aims at maximizing
reconstruction distortion. Their results demonstrate improved
privacy with minimal impact to task performance.
Despite the successful results achieved by the aforementioned task-oriented communication systems, there remain
several key areas that warrant further investigation and improvement. One significant limitation in the existing literature
is the lack of results and comprehensive benchmarking on
the mutual information between the encoded features and the
input, given a particular task-oriented communication system.
In task-oriented communication systems, mutual information
plays a critical role in determining the efficiency of the system,
particularly regarding the preservation of information during
transmission.
Furthermore, while task-specific performance, specifically
classification accuracy, has been improved by these advancements, there is still room for enhancing performance further.
Another key challenge in these systems is balancing multiple
trade-offs, such as task performance, informativeness, minimality and privacy. These trade-offs are typically managed
through careful tuning of hyperparameters. Reducing the dependency on hyperparameters would make these systems more
robust and easier to deploy in real-world scenarios.
Contrastive learning has gained significant attention in recent years, particularly for its success in unsupervised learning
[17], [22]–[24]. By leveraging the concept of instance discrimination, contrastive learning methods aim to pull together
positive pairs for example, augmentations of the same image,
while pushing apart negative pairs for example, different images, thus learning meaningful representations of data without
the need for labels. More recently, contrastive learning has also
shown exceptional results in supervised learning scenarios.
By incorporating label information into the contrastive loss
function, methods such as supervised contrastive learning
(SupCon) [25] have improved upon traditional cross-entropy
loss. Contrastive learning has not been investigated for taskoriented communication systems as an alternative to crossentropy based mutual information approximation techniques.
Disentangled representation learning has been widely studied in recent years. Prominent examples include the 𝛽-VAE
[26], that extends the variational autoencoder (VAE) by introducing a regularization term that encourages disentanglement, and FactorVAE [27], that further improves this disentanglement by encouraging the representations’ distribution
to be factorial and therefore independent across the dimensions. Other works [28]–[30], explored disentangling through
adversarial-based objectives [31].
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND N OTATIONS
A. Notations
Throughout this paper, we use the following notational conventions. Random variables are denoted by uppercase letters,

3

such as 𝑋, 𝑌 , and 𝑍. Their corresponding realizations (i.e.,
specific instances) are denoted by lowercase bold letters, such
as 𝒙, 𝒚, and 𝒛. The space from which these random variables
are drawn is represented by calligraphic letters, such as X, Y
and Z. We denote entropy of a random variable 𝑋 by 𝐻 (𝑋).
The mutual information between two random variables 𝑋 and
𝑌 , is denoted by 𝐼 (𝑋; 𝑌 ). We use 𝐼 (𝑍; 𝑋 |𝑌 ) to denote the
conditional mutual information between 𝑍 and 𝑋 given 𝑌 . We
use the expectation notation E[·], which refers to the average
value of a random variable over a distribution. Most of the
symbols in the article are listed in Table I.
B. System Model
We consider a semantic communication system designed
for next-generation 6G-enabled Internet of Things (6G-IoT)
networks, where distributed edge devices must transmit taskrelevant information to centralized or cloud-based servers
under strict constraints on bandwidth, latency, and privacy.
In such settings, communication should prioritize the efficient
delivery of minimal yet informative representations, discarding
irrelevant or sensitive content that is unnecessary for the
downstream task.
The transmitter includes a feature extractor and a joint
source-channel coding (JSCC) encoder. We collectively refer
to these components as the task-relevant encoder. The taskrelevant encoder encodes an input image 𝒙 ∈ X into a lowerdimensional feature vector 𝒛 ∈ Z. Encoded vector 𝒛 is then
transmitted to a receiver over a noisy wireless channel. The
primary objective is to transmit a minimal and informative
representation, by discarding task-irrelevant information while
ensuring that 𝒛 contains only the essential information for
accurate downstream classification at the receiver.
The overall transmission and decoding process can be
described by the following Markov chain:
𝑌 → 𝑋 → 𝑍 → 𝑍ˆ → 𝑌ˆ ,

(1)

where 𝑋 is the random variable representing the input images,
𝑍 is the random variable representing the encoded feature
vectors, 𝑍ˆ is the noisy signals received by the receiver, 𝑌 is the
random variable representing the labels of the input images,
and 𝑌ˆ is the random variable representing the predicted labels
at the receiver.
At the transmitter, the task-relevant encoder encodes input
image 𝒙 ∈ R 𝑁 , where 𝑁 represents the number of pixels in the
image (Height × Width × Color Channels). The encoder maps
this input into a lower-dimensional feature vector 𝒛 ∈ R𝑑 ,
where 𝑑 is the dimension of the encoded feature vector.
The encoding function, denoted by 𝑓 𝜃 : R 𝑁 → R𝑑 , is
parameterized by 𝜃, and the encoding process can be expressed
as
𝒛 = 𝑓 𝜃 (𝒙)
(2)
Feature vector 𝒛 is then prepared for transmission over the
wireless channel by being mapped to channel input symbols.
The role of the task-relevant encoder is twofold: encoding
the input data into feature representations and preparing them
as channel symbols suitable for transmission. The encoded

TABLE I. Description of Symbols
Symbol

Description

𝒚, 𝑌
𝒙, 𝑋
𝒛, 𝑍
ẑ, 𝑍ˆ

Target variable and its realization
Input variable and its realization
Encoded feature and its realization
Received (noisy) encoded feature and its realization
Task-relevant feature and its realization
Task-irrelevant feature and its realization
Predicted label and its realization
Input, label, and feature spaces
Entropy function
Mutual and conditional mutual information
Expectation operator
Identity matrix
Probability distribution
Statistical Gaussian distribution
Additive Gaussian noise
Task-relevant encoder, parameterized by 𝜃
Task-irrelevant encoder, parameterized by 𝜂
Reconstructor, parameterized by 𝜔
Projection head , parameterized by 𝜓
Classifier, parameterized by 𝜙
Discriminator, parameterized by 𝜈

𝒛 1 , 𝑍1
𝒛 2 , 𝑍2
𝒚ˆ , 𝑌ˆ
X, Y, Z
𝐻 (·)
𝐼 (·; ·) , 𝐼 (·; · | ·)
E[ · ]
I
𝑝 (·)
N
n
𝑓 𝜃 (·)
𝑔 𝜂 (·)
𝑟 𝜔 (·)
ℎ 𝜓 (·)
𝑞 𝜙 (·)
𝐷𝜈 (·)

feature vector 𝒛 ∈ R𝑑 is transmitted over a wireless channel, which is modeled as an additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel. The channel introduces noise and distortion,
and the received signal 𝒛ˆ ∈ R𝑑 at the receiver is expressed as
𝒛ˆ = 𝒛 + 𝒏,

(3)

where 𝒏 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 I) is the additive Gaussian noise with
variance 𝜎 2 . The noise variance 𝜎 2 is related to the channel’s
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which quantifies the channel
quality. The SNR in decibels (dB) is given by


E[∥𝒛∥ 2 ]
SNRdB = 10 log10
.
(4)
𝜎2
At the receiver, typically a cloud or edge server, a classifier,
denoted by 𝑞 𝜙 : R𝑑 → R 𝑀 , where 𝑀 is the number of labels,
is parameterized by 𝜙. The classifier maps the received noisy
signal 𝒛ˆ to predicted label 𝑦ˆ ∈ R 𝑀 as
𝒚ˆ = 𝑞 𝜙 ( 𝒛ˆ ).

(5)

The classifier is trained to minimize the loss between the
predicted label ( 𝒚ˆ ) and the true label (𝒚). Since true posterior
distribution 𝑝(𝒚| 𝒛ˆ ) is intractable, 𝑞 𝜙 serves as an approximation based on the received noisy signal.
IV. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION
In this section, we identify the primary challenges that
arise when transmitting features over a communication channel
and utilizing them for a downstream classification task. Our
goal is to ensure that the transmitted features contain only
the minimum necessary information required for the downstream task to maximize efficiency whilst being privacy aware.
Furthermore, we argue that it is necessary to have a fair,
reproducible, and unified method to obtain comparative values
that act as a proxy for mutual information between the encoded

4

B. Privacy Concerns and Task-Irrelevant Information
The second challenge is privacy concerns due to the leakage
ˆ If 𝑍ˆ retains
of task-irrelevant information from 𝑋 into 𝑍.
information about 𝑋 that is not relevant to predicting 𝑌 ,
this may inadvertently expose sensitive or private data, and
could make the system more vulnerable to different attacks
such as attribute inference attacks and model inversion attacks
[33], [21]. Therefore, disentangling task-irrelevant information
ensures that 𝑍ˆ does not encode unnecessary or sensitive
information that is not directly relevant to the downstream
task, which minimizes privacy risks.
C. Quantifying Information Retention
Figure 1. Information diagram for three random variables 𝑋,
ˆ The union of the blue and pink regions yields 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
ˆ 𝑋),
𝑌 , 𝑍.
ˆ 𝑌 ).
and the union of the blue and green regions yields 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
features and the input data to allow effective benchmarking of
different task-oriented communication systems.

A. Minimum Necessary Information
Following [32], the Minimum Necessary Information (MNI)
criterion for an ideal representation 𝑍ˆ under ideal transmission
conditions must satisfy the following key principles:
• Informativeness: Representation 𝑍ˆ should contain all
the necessary information to predict 𝑌 , requiring us to
ˆ 𝑌 ).
maximize the mutual information 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
• Necessity: Representation 𝑍ˆ should contain the necessary
amount of information in order to perform well in the
downstream task, any less information would mean that
𝑍 has discarded task-relevant information. Necessity can
be defined as
ˆ
𝐼 (𝑋; 𝑌 ) ≤ 𝐼 (𝑌 ; 𝑍)
(6)
• Minimality: Among all possible representations 𝑍

that
satisfy the task of predicting 𝑌 , we seek the one that
encodes the least amount of information about 𝑋 beyond
what is strictly necessary for the task. This can be
formulated as
ˆ 𝑋)
min 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
𝑍ˆ

subject to

ˆ 𝑌)
𝐼 (𝑋; 𝑌 ) = 𝐼 ( 𝑍;

(7)

Any more information than that would result in 𝑍 having
redundant information about 𝑋 that is unnecessary for
predicting 𝑌 .
Given the above we conclude that in an optimal case under
ideal channel conditions we must have
ˆ 𝑋) = 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
ˆ 𝑌 ) = 𝐼 (𝑋; 𝑌 ),
𝐼 ( 𝑍;

(8)

this implies that 𝑍ˆ contains exactly the amount of information
necessary to perform the task of predicting 𝑌 from 𝑋, no
more and no less. At the MNI point, 𝑍ˆ captures all the
relevant information needed for the task, while discarding any
irrelevant or redundant information about 𝑋.

In task-oriented communication systems, it is critical to
ˆ 𝑋)
have an understanding of the mutual information 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
as it provides insights into how much of the original input
information 𝑋 is encoded in 𝑍ˆ and can directly affect latency,
bandwidth and privacy. However, a significant challenge arises
ˆ 𝑋) varies drastically depending
because the estimation of 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
on the estimation method used. Indeed, multiple works have
ˆ 𝑋) for the same task-oriented
reported widely different 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
approach [16], [29]. This makes it difficult to arrive at reliable
conclusions about the amount of information being retained in
ˆ
𝑍.
Given these discrepancies, we argue that it is crucial to
devise a method that yields consistent, reliable and fair comparative estimates of information retention, even if the exact
ˆ 𝑋) is intractable. Instead of absolute precision, a
value of 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
method that provides relative and comparable estimates across
different systems would greatly enhance the ability to evaluate
and optimize different task-oriented communication systems.
D. Limitations of Variational Information Bottleneck (VIB)
The variational information bottleneck (VIB) has been the
de facto method for many task-oriented communication systems. VIB tries to minimize the following objective:
ˆ 𝑋) − 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
ˆ 𝑌 ),
LVIB = 𝛽𝐼 ( 𝑍;

(9)

ˆ 𝑋) measures the amount of information retained
where 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
ˆ 𝑌 ) represents the informativeness
from the input 𝑋, and 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
of 𝑍 for predicting 𝑌 . Hyperparameter 𝛽 controls the trade-off
between preserving task-relevant information and discarding
ˆ 𝑌 ), a cross-entropy
irrelevant information. To maximize 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
based loss is used, and the Kullback–Leibler divergence is
ˆ 𝑋) [13], [15], [16].
used to to minimize 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
However, VIB-based task-oriented communication systems
presents several challenges:
• Limitation of cross-entropy based loss: The majority of
task-oriented communication systems rely on the crossentropy loss as a vraitaional approximation to maximize
ˆ 𝑌 ). However, it has been shown recently that super𝐼 ( 𝑍;
vised contrastive learning based loss [25] outperforms the
cross-entropy loss in different settings.
• Conflicting objectives: The VIB objective which maxˆ 𝑋) and minimizes 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
ˆ 𝑌 ) leads to a conimizes 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
flicting objective as shown by [32]. If we consider the

5

information diagram [34] presented in Fig. 1, it is evident
ˆ is a
that the region shaded in blue, namely 𝐼 (𝑋; 𝑌 ; 𝑍)
ˆ
ˆ
subset of 𝐼 ( 𝑍; 𝑋) and 𝐼 ( 𝑍; 𝑌 ) and is therefore maximized
and minimized simultaneously.
• Inadequate disentanglement: VIB does not explicitly
enforce a separation between the portions of 𝑍 that are
relevant for predicting 𝑌 and those that capture irrelevant
or redundant details from 𝑋. This lack of disentanglement can compromise the privacy and efficiency of the
transmitted representation.
V. P ROPOSED M ETHOD : CLAD
The core idea of CLAD is to create an end-to-end communication system that explicitly learns to disentangle taskrelevant information from task-irrelevant content, enabling
both high task accuracy and improved privacy. CLAD integrates supervised contrastive learning, adversarial training,
and reconstruction-based supervision into a unified, structured
framework that aligns with the MNI principle.
Each component in CLAD is designed to target a specific
challenge:
• Contrastive learning maximizes the informativeness of
the representation with respect to the downstream task.
• Adversarial disentanglement promotes independence
between task-relevant and irrelevant features, suppressing
information leakage.
• Reconstruction learning ensures that task-irrelevant features are adequately captured.
To ensure effective optimization, CLAD adopts a threestage training strategy, where each stage isolates and refines a
different component of the system. This design is intentional
as it prevents interference between competing objectives, stabilizes training, and encourages modular reuse of the encoders
across stages.
CLAD utilizes two key encoders: the task-relevant encoder,
which maps the input into the task-relevant channel codeword
𝑍1 , and the task-irrelevant encoder , which maps the input into
task-irrelevant channel codeword 𝑍2 . The task performance
is optimized through contrastive learning, which aims to
maximize the mutual information 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ1 ; 𝑌 ), ensuring that 𝑍ˆ1
captures the most informative features for downstream classification. The disentanglement is achieved through reconstruction
learning to capture task-irrelevant information in 𝑍ˆ2 , and
adversarial training is utilized to minimize the mutual information 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ1 ; 𝑍ˆ2 ), thus promoting independence between the two
feature representations. The different components and training
stages of CLAD are visualized in Fig. 2. These components
are optimized together to ensure both high task accuracy and
effective disentanglement of information, corresponding to the
following maximization objective:
LCLAD = 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ1 ; 𝑌 ) + 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ2 ; 𝑋 |𝑌 ) − 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ1 ; 𝑍ˆ2 ).

(10)

Here, the objective consists of three key terms:
• 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ1 ; 𝑌 ) maximizes the mutual information between taskrelevant features 𝑍ˆ1 and the label 𝑌 using contrastive
learning;

Figure 2. Three stages for training CLAD
𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ2 ; 𝑋 |𝑌 ) ensures that 𝑍ˆ2 captures the residual information in 𝑋 that is not covered by 𝑌 by utilizing a
reconstruction loss;
• 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ1 ; 𝑍ˆ2 ) minimizes the information overlap between 𝑍ˆ1
and 𝑍ˆ2 , encouraging disentanglement via an adversarial
loss.

•

Reflecting back on Fig. 1, we can see that our new objective
maximizes the blue region (task-relevant information) and
minimizes the pink region (task-irrelevant information) and
avoids the conflicting objectives of VIB. We explain each of
the components of our loss function in detail below, accompanied by their mathematical formulations, implementation
details, and training strategy.
Algorithm 1 Stage 1: Train Task-Irrelevant Encoder with
Reconstructor
Input: X𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑖𝑛 (Training dataset), 𝜅 (SNR), 𝜆 (Learning rate)
Output: Frozen task-irrelevant encoder 𝑔 𝜂
1: Initialize 𝜂, 𝜔
2: while not converged do
3:
Sample (𝒙, 𝒚) ∼ X𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑖𝑛
4:
𝒛 2 ← 𝑔 𝜂 (𝒙)
2
5:
𝒏 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 I), 𝜎 2 ← E[ ∥𝒛 2𝜅∥ ]
10 10
6:
𝒛ˆ 2 ← 𝒛2 + 𝒏
7:
𝒙ˆ ← 𝑟 𝜔 ( 𝒛ˆ 2 , 𝒚)
8:
Lrecon ← ∥𝒙 − 𝒙ˆ ∥ 2
9:
𝜂 ← 𝜂 − 𝜆∇ 𝜂 Lrecon
10:
𝜔 ← 𝜔 − 𝜆∇ 𝜔 Lrecon
11: end while
12: Discard 𝑟 𝜔
13: Freeze 𝜂

6

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3. (a): Self-supervised contrastive learning: The model works only on augmentations of the same image; (b): Supervised
contrastive learning: Label information is used to align similar classes in vector space; and (c) Both self-supervised and
supervised contrastive learning push apart different images in the vector space.

A. Contrastive Loss for Task-Relevant Features
To maximize 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 1 ; 𝑌 ), we adopt a supervised contrastive
learning framework similar to [25]. First, we apply an augmentation function, which applies different augmentations such as
cropping, rotating and reflecting, Aug(·) to the input image
𝒙 to generate two different views 𝒙˜ 1 = Aug(𝒙) and 𝒙˜ 2 =
Aug(𝒙). These augmented samples are then passed through
the TRE, denoted by 𝑓 𝜃 (·), resulting in two representations,
𝒛 1 = 𝑓 𝜃 ( 𝒙˜ 1 ) and 𝒛2 = 𝑓 𝜃 ( 𝒙˜ 2 ), where 𝒛 ∈ R𝑑 .
Following that, these representations are transmitted over
the physical channel and projected into a lower-dimensional
space through a projection head, ℎ 𝜓 (·) parameterized by 𝜓,
yielding 𝒉1 = ℎ 𝜓 ( 𝒛ˆ1 ) and 𝒉2 = ℎ 𝜓 ( 𝒛ˆ2 ), where 𝒉 ∈ R𝑑 𝑝 , and
𝑑 𝑝 represents the dimensionality of the projection space.
A contrastive loss, Lcontrast , is designed to maximize the
agreement between representations of similar class samples
while minimizing the similarity between representations of different class samples. Considering a batch of intermediate features [𝒛 1 , . . . , 𝒛 𝐵 ] and their corresponding labels [𝒚 1 , . . . , 𝒚 𝐵 ],
the loss function is defined as

exp 𝒉⊤
𝑖 𝒉 𝑗 /𝜏
(11)
𝑆𝑖 𝑗 = Í 𝐵
,
⊤
𝑘=1 1𝑖≠𝑘 exp 𝒉𝑖 𝒉 𝑘 /𝜏
∑︁
1
1 𝑦𝑖 =𝑦 𝑗 log 𝑆𝑖 𝑗 ,
𝑖≠ 𝑗 1 𝑦𝑖 =𝑦 𝑗 𝑖≠ 𝑗

Lcontrast = − Í

(12)

where 𝑆𝑖 𝑗 represents the similarity score between the projected
representations 𝒉𝑖 and 𝒉 𝑗 , 𝜏 is a temperature scaling factor,
and 1 𝑦𝑖 =𝑦 𝑗 is an indicator function that equals 1 if 𝑦 𝑖 = 𝑦 𝑗
(positive pairs) and 0 otherwise (negative pairs). This loss encourages encoder 𝑓 𝜃 (·) to learn class-discriminative features,
ensuring that the latent representation 𝒛 captures the necessary
information for the downstream classification task. Supervised
contrastive learning is presented visually in Fig 3.
Next, we prove that minimizing the contrastive loss, defined above, maximizes a lower bound on the task-relevant
ˆ 𝑌 ). We begin by considering a simplified
information 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
situation where we have a query sample 𝒉+ together with a
set 𝑯 = {𝒉1 , . . . , 𝒉 𝐵 } consisting of 𝐵 samples. In this set,
one sample 𝒉 𝑝 is a positive sample from the same class as
𝒉+ , while the other negative samples are randomly sampled.
Namely, 𝑯 = {𝒉 𝑝 } ∪ 𝑯 neg . The expectation of the contrastive
loss is given by

"

#

exp(𝒉+ ⊤ 𝒉 𝑝 /𝜏)

E[Lcontrast ] = E𝒉+ ,𝑯 − log Í 𝐵

𝑖=1 exp(𝒉

+⊤

(13)

.
𝒉𝑖 /𝜏)

Equation (13) can be viewed as a categorical cross-entropy
loss for recognizing the positive sample 𝒉 𝑝 . We define the
optimal probability of identifying the positive sample as
𝑝 (𝒉 𝑖 | 𝑦)
Î
𝑝(𝒉𝑖 |𝑦) 𝑙≠𝑖 𝑝(𝒉𝑙 )
𝑝 (𝒉 𝑖 )
𝑃(𝒉𝑖 |𝑯) = Í 𝐵
=Í
. (14)
Î
𝐵 𝑝 (𝒉 𝑗 | 𝑦)
𝑝(𝒉
|𝑦)
𝑝(𝒉
)
𝑗
𝑙
𝑙≠ 𝑗
𝑗=1
𝑗=1
𝑝 (𝒉 𝑗 )

𝑝

This shows that the optimal value of exp(𝒉+ ⊤ 𝒉 𝑝 /𝜏) is 𝑝𝑝(𝒉(𝒉 𝑝| 𝑦)
) .
Assuming that 𝒉+ is uniformly sampled from all classes, we
derive the following bound,
optimal

E[Lcontrast ] ≥ E[Lcontrast ]


𝑝 (𝒉 𝑝 | 𝑦)


𝑝 (𝒉 𝑝 )


(15)
= E 𝑦,𝑯 − log Í
𝑝 (𝒉 𝑗 | 𝑦) 
𝐵


𝑗=1
𝑝
(𝒉
)
𝑗




𝑝 (𝒉 𝑝 | 𝑦)


𝑝 (𝒉 𝑝 )


= E 𝑦,𝑯 − log
𝑝
Í
𝑝 (𝒉 𝑗 | 𝑦) 
𝑝 (𝒉 | 𝑦)

+
𝑝
𝒉 𝑗 ∈𝑯 neg 𝑝 (𝒉 𝑗 ) 
𝑝 (𝒉 )










𝑝(𝒉 𝑝 ) ∑︁ 𝑝(𝒉 𝑗 |𝑦)  
= E 𝑦,𝑯 log 1 +
.
𝑝


𝑝(𝒉 |𝑦)
𝑝(𝒉 𝑗 )  



𝒉
∈𝑯
𝑗
neg



(16)
For large 𝐵, from the law of large numbers, we can approximate the sum of negative samples by its expected value as
follows,

≈ E 𝑦,𝑯



𝑝(𝒉 𝑗 |𝑦)
𝑝(𝒉 𝑝 )
log 1 +
(𝐵 − 1)E𝒉 𝑗 ∼ 𝑝 (𝒉 𝑗 )
𝑝
𝑝(𝒉 |𝑦)
𝑝(𝒉 𝑗 )


.
(17)

Since the negative samples are class-neutral (i.e., independent
of 𝑦), the inner expectation over negative samples 𝒉 𝑗 simplifies to a constant value. This allows us to focus the outer
expectation on 𝑦 and 𝒉 𝑝 , concentrating on the probability of
correctly identifying the positive sample among the negatives
as follows,

7





𝑝



𝑝(𝒉 )
= E 𝑦,𝒉 𝑝 log 1 +
(𝐵 − 1)
𝑝(𝒉 𝑝 |𝑦)



𝑝(𝒉 𝑝 )
≥ E 𝑦,𝒉 𝑝 log
(𝐵 − 1)
𝑝(𝒉 𝑝 |𝑦)




𝑝(𝒉 𝑝 |𝑦)
𝑝
+ log(𝐵 − 1)
= E 𝑦,𝒉 − log
𝑝(𝒉 𝑝 )
= −𝐼 (𝒉 𝑝 ; 𝑦) + log(𝐵 − 1) ≥ −𝐼 ( 𝒛ˆ; 𝑦) + log(𝐵 − 1).
(18)
From the above, the last inequality in (18) follows from the
data processing inequality [19]. Finally, we conclude that
ˆ 𝑌 ),
E[Lcontrast ] ≥ log(𝐵 − 1) − 𝐼 ( 𝑍;

(19)

and thus minimizing Lcontrast maximizes a lower bound of
ˆ 𝑌 ). Increasing 𝐵 raises log(𝐵 − 1), thereby strengthening
𝐼 ( 𝑍,
this lower bound and enhancing performance by preserving
more task-relevant information. Although the derived bound
can be loose with a small number of negative samples [17],
we mitigate this by sampling large batches (2048) during
contrastive training.

The first term, E 𝑝 ( 𝒙,𝒚 )𝑞 ( 𝒛ˆ 2 | 𝒙) [log 𝑝(𝒙| 𝒚, 𝒛ˆ 2 ), represents the
expected log-likelihood of reconstructing 𝒙 given both 𝒚
and 𝒛ˆ 2 . The second term, E 𝑝 ( 𝒙,𝒚 ) [log 𝑝(𝒙| 𝒚)], represents the
expected log-likelihood of reconstructing 𝒙 based solely on 𝒚,
independent of the task-irrelevant features.
Minimizing the reconstruction loss Lrecon effectively approximates the maximization of the first term in the mutual
information expression, thereby increasing 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 2 ; 𝑋 |𝑌 ). By
optimizing both the encoder 𝑔 𝜂 and the reconstructor 𝑟 𝜔 ,
we ensure that 𝒛ˆ 2 captures task-irrelevant information while
leveraging 𝒚 for the reconstruction of task-relevant features in
𝒙.
C. Adversarial Disentanglement
To approximate the minimization of the mutual information
𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 1 ; 𝑍ˆ 2 ), we employ adversarial training, following the approach in [28]. This ensures that task-relevant features in 𝑍ˆ 1
and task-irrelevant features in 𝑍ˆ 2 are disentangled. The mutual
information 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 1 ; 𝑍ˆ 2 ) quantifies the dependence between 𝑍ˆ 1
and 𝑍ˆ 2 . It is formally defined as
𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 1 ; 𝑍ˆ 2 ) =

B. Reconstruction for Task-Irrelevant Features
To maximize 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 2 ; 𝑋 |𝑌 ), we use a reconstruction-based
objective that ensures 𝑋 is reconstructed from both 𝑌 and 𝑍ˆ 2 ,
where 𝑍ˆ 2 captures the information in 𝑋 that is not already
captured by 𝑌 . Let 𝑔 𝜂 : R 𝑁 → R𝑑 represent the task-irrelevant
encoder, parameterized by 𝜂, which maps input 𝒙 ∈ R 𝑁 to
encoded task-irrelevant representation 𝒛ˆ 2 ∈ R𝑑 . The encoder
approximates the posterior distribution of the latent variable
𝒛ˆ 2 given 𝒙, which we denote by 𝑞( 𝒛ˆ 2 |𝒙). This encoder is
responsible for capturing features unrelated to the task, i.e., the
features not directly useful for predicting 𝒚. Mathematically,
the encoded task-irrelevant representation is given by
𝒛2 = 𝑔 𝜂 (𝒙),

(20)

where 𝑑 represents the dimensionality of the task-irrelevant
feature space.
Next, we introduce the reconstructor 𝑟 𝜔 : R𝑑 × R 𝑀 → R 𝑁 ,
parameterized by 𝜔. The reconstructor 𝑟 𝜔 takes as input both
noisy task-irrelevant features 𝒛ˆ 2 and task-relevant label 𝒚 and
attempts to reconstruct the original input 𝒙. The objective is
to minimize the reconstruction error, ensuring that 𝒛ˆ 2 focuses
solely on task-irrelevant information. The reconstruction loss
is defined as


Lrecon = E 𝑝 ( 𝒙,𝒚 ) ∥𝑟 𝜔 ( 𝒛ˆ 2 , 𝒚) − 𝒙∥ 2 .
(21)
To justify this approach, we show how this reconstructionbased loss provides an approximation for the mutual information 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 2 ; 𝑋 |𝑌 ). Using a variational encoder and reconstruction
model 𝑟 𝜔 (𝒙| 𝒛ˆ 2 , 𝒚), we can approximate 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 2 ; 𝑋 |𝑌 ) as follows,
𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 2 ; 𝑋 |𝑌 ) ≥ E 𝑝 ( 𝒙,𝒚 )𝑞 ( 𝒛ˆ 2 | 𝒙) [log 𝑝(𝒙| 𝒚, 𝒛ˆ 2 )]
− E 𝑝 ( 𝒙,𝒚 ) [log 𝑝(𝒙| 𝒚)] .

(22)



∫ ∫
𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) log
𝒛ˆ 1

𝒛ˆ 2


𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 )
𝑑 𝒛ˆ 1 𝑑 𝒛ˆ 2 . (23)
𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 ) 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 2 )

Minimizing it promotes independence between these two
representations. However, directly computing 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 1 ; 𝑍ˆ 2 ) is intractable since it requires access to the underlying joint distribution 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) and the product of the marginals 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 ) 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 2 ).
To circumvent this, we approximate the minimization using
a discriminator to distinguish between samples drawn from
the joint distribution 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) and samples drawn from the
product of the marginals 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 ) 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 2 ).
To approximate the joint distribution, we sample pairs
( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) from the encoder’s output for the same input data
point, which represents samples from 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ). For the
marginal distribution, we shuffle 𝒛ˆ 2 across the batch, generating ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2′ ), where 𝒛ˆ 2′ is a shuffled version of 𝒛ˆ 2 from a
different data point. This ensures that 𝒛ˆ 1 and 𝒛ˆ 2′ are independent, approximating the product of the marginals 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 ) 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 2 ).
Let 𝐷 𝜈 represent the discriminator parameterized by 𝜈, trained
to distinguish between joint samples ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) and marginal
samples ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2′ ). The adversarial loss is defined as
Ladv = E 𝑝 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) [log 𝐷 𝜈 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 )]


+ E 𝑝 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 ) 𝑝 ( 𝒛ˆ 2 ) log 1 − 𝐷 𝜈 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2′ ) .

(24)

This loss encourages 𝐷 𝜈 to assign high probabilities to true
joint samples ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) and low probabilities to independent
(shuffled) samples ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2′ ).
To promote disentanglement in the encoder, we add an
adversarial penalty to the encoder’s loss. The encoder is trained
to fool the discriminator by making the joint distribution
𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) indistinguishable from the product of the marginals
𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 1 ) 𝑝( 𝒛ˆ 2 ). The encoder’s loss for disentanglement is defined
as
Lenc = E 𝑝 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) [log(1 − 𝐷 𝜈 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ))] .

(25)

8

Minimizing Lenc encourages the encoder to make 𝒛ˆ 1 and 𝒛ˆ 2 as
independent as possible, thereby minimizing the mutual information 𝐼 ( 𝑍ˆ 1 ; 𝑍ˆ 2 ). This ensures that the latent representations
𝒛ˆ 1 and 𝒛ˆ 2 are disentangled, with 𝒛ˆ 1 capturing task-relevant
information and 𝒛ˆ 2 capturing task-irrelevant information.
Algorithm 2 Stage 2: Train Task-Relevant Encoder with
Contrastive Loss and Discriminator
Input: X𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑖𝑛 (Training dataset), 𝑔 𝜂 (Task-irrelevant encoder),
𝜆 (Learning rate), 𝜆adv (Discrimnator learning rate), 𝜅
(SNR), 𝜏 (Temperature)
Output: 𝑓 𝜃
1: Initialize 𝜃, 𝜓, 𝜈
2: while not converged do
3:
(𝒙, 𝒚) ∼ X𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑖𝑛
4:
𝒙˜ 1 ← Augment(𝒙), 𝒙˜ 2 ← Augment(𝒙)
5:
𝒛1(1) ← 𝑓 𝜃 ( 𝒙˜ 1 ), 𝒛 1(2) ← 𝑓 𝜃 ( 𝒙˜ 2 )
2
6:
𝒏1 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 I), 𝜎 2 ← E[ ∥𝒛 1𝜅∥ ]
10 10

7:
8:
9:
10:

2

𝒏2 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 I), 𝜎 2 ← E[ ∥𝒛 2𝜅∥ ]

10 10
𝒛ˆ 1(1) ← 𝒛1(1) + 𝒏1 , 𝒛ˆ 1(2) ← 𝒛 1(2) + 𝒏1
𝒉1 ← ℎ 𝜓 ( 𝒛ˆ 1(1) ), 𝒉2 ← ℎ 𝜓 ( 𝒛ˆ 1(2) )
Lcontrast ← Contrastive Loss(𝒉1 , 𝒉2 , 𝜏)

𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝜆∇ 𝜃 Lcontrast
𝜓 ← 𝜓 − 𝜆∇ 𝜓 Lcontrast
𝒛1 ← 𝑓 𝜃 (𝒙), 𝒛 2 ← 𝑔 𝜂 (𝒙)
𝒛ˆ 1 ← 𝒛1 + 𝒏1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ← 𝒛2 + 𝒏2
𝒛ˆ 2′ ← Shuffle 𝒛ˆ 2 across the batch
Ladv ← log 𝐷 𝜈 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ) + log(1 − 𝐷 𝜈 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2′ ))
𝜈 ← 𝜈 − 𝜆adv ∇𝜈 Ladv
18:
Lenc ← log(1 − 𝐷 𝜈 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 , 𝒛ˆ 2 ))
19:
𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝜆∇ 𝜃 Lenc
20: end while
21: Discard ℎ 𝜓 , 𝐷 𝜈 𝑔 𝜂
22: Freeze 𝜃
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:

D. Classification Task
The final downstream task is classification, where the goal
is to predict the label 𝑌 from the encoded features 𝑍ˆ 1 . We
use a simple feed-forward neural network classifier 𝑞 𝜙 (𝒚| 𝒛ˆ 1 ),
parameterized by 𝜙, and trained with a cross-entropy loss. The
classifier takes as input the task-relevant features 𝒛ˆ 1 and is
optimized to minimize the following cross-entropy loss:
"𝐶
#
∑︁
Lclass = −E 𝑝 ( 𝒙,𝒚 )
𝑦 𝑐 log 𝑞 𝜙 (𝑦 𝑐 | 𝒛ˆ 1 ) ,
(26)

Algorithm 3 Stage 3: Train Classifier on Frozen Task-Relevant
Encoder
Input: X𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑖𝑛 (Training dataset), 𝑓 𝜃 (Task relevant encoder),
learning rate 𝜆, 𝜅 (SNR)
Output: Trained classifier 𝑞 𝜙
1: Initialize 𝜙
2: while not converged do
3:
Sample (𝒙, 𝒚) ∼ X𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑖𝑛
4:
𝒛 1 ← 𝑓 𝜃 (𝒙)
2
5:
𝒏 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 I), 𝜎 2 ← E[ ∥𝒛 1𝜅∥ ]
10 10
6:
𝒛ˆ 1 ← 𝒛1 + 𝒏
7:
𝒚ˆ ← 𝑞 𝜙 ( 𝒛ˆ 1 )
Í
ˆ𝑖
8:
Lclass ← − 𝐶
𝑖=1 𝒚 𝑖 log 𝒚
9:
𝜙 ← 𝜙 − 𝜆∇ 𝜙 Lclass
10: end while
the system. Below, we outline the step-by-step procedure used
to train our model and the associated algorithms.
Stage 1: Training the Task-Irrelevant Encoder: In the first
stage, we train the task-irrelevant encoder 𝑔 𝜂 by pairing
it with a reconstructor 𝑟 𝜔 . The reconstructor 𝑟 𝜔 , learns to
reconstruct an image by using the encoded representations
from 𝑔 𝜂 as well as the label information𝒚. This encourages
𝑔 𝜂 to focus on capturing the parts of the input that are not
necessary for the downstream classification task by minimizing
the reconstruction loss. The reconstructor is discarded, and the
parameters of 𝑔 𝜂 are frozen after training to preserve the taskirrelevant features for later use. This procedure is outlined in
Algorithm 1.
Stage 2: Training the Task-Relevant Encoder with Contrastive
Loss and Discriminator: After freezing 𝑔 𝜂 , the task-relevant
encoder 𝑓 𝜃 is trained in this stage. We use both a contrastive
loss to ensure that 𝑓 𝜃 captures class-discriminative features
and an adversarial loss to enforce disentanglement between the
task-relevant encoder 𝑓 𝜃 feature vector and the task-irrelevant
encoder 𝑔 𝜂 feature vector. The task-relevant encoder is trained
using augmented views of the input for contrastive learning
and through adversarial training with the discriminator 𝐷 𝜈 .
The training process alternates between updating the contrastive loss and updating the discriminator and encoder to
ensure disentanglement. The details of this stage are described
in Algorithm 2.

E. Training Procedure

Stage 3: Training the Classifier on the Frozen Task-Relevant
Encoder: Once disentanglement is achieved, we discard the
projection head ℎ 𝜓 , the discriminator 𝐷 𝜈 , and the taskirrelevant encoder 𝑔 𝜂 , leaving only the frozen task-relevant
encoder 𝑓 𝜃 . In this final stage, we train the classifier 𝑞 𝜙 on top
of 𝑓 𝜃 for the downstream classification task. The classifier is
trained with the cross-entropy loss, ensuring that it can utilize
the task-relevant features 𝑓 𝜃 for accurate classification. The
classifier training procedure is outlined in Algorithm 3.

Training a complex system with many different components
and loss function must be performed carefully to ensure that
each stage achieves its goal without interfering with other objectives and that the gradients flow appropriately. The training
is done in multiple stages, each targeting a different part of

The separation of training stages is for stability, and also
reflects a modular decomposition of the CLAD objective.
Each stage isolates the gradient flow to the component most
relevant for that term, making the multi-stage training strategy
a practical approximation to optimizing LCLAD holistically.

𝑐=1

where 𝐶 is the number of classes, and 𝑦 𝑐 is the ground truth
one-hot encoded label for class 𝑐.

9

ˆ 𝑋) = 𝐻 (𝑋) − 𝐻 (𝑋 | 𝑍)
ˆ ≥ 𝐻 (𝑋) − E 𝑝 ( 𝒙, 𝒛ˆ ) [Lrecon (𝒙| 𝒛ˆ )] ,
𝐼 ( 𝑍;
(27)
where 𝐻 (𝑋) represents the entropy of the input, and
Lrecon (𝒙| 𝒛ˆ ) is the reconstruction loss. Therefore, one can
ˆ 𝑋) by minimizing the reconstruction error as
compute 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
follows:
𝛾
ˆ 𝑋) ≥ 𝐻 (𝑋) − min Lrecon
𝐼 ( 𝑍;
(𝒙| 𝒛ˆ ).
(28)
𝛾

In practice, for each task-oriented communication method
we evaluate, the corresponding encoder parameters are frozen,
and a reconstructor 𝑟 𝛾 is trained to minimize the reconstruction
loss 𝐿 recon (𝒙| 𝒛ˆ ). The reconstructor is trained using mean
squared error (MSE) as the loss function, and we evaluate
the quality of the reconstructions using the structural similarity index measure (SSIM) [36]. SSIM serves as a proxy
for the total mutual information between the input and the
representation and can indicate the amount of encoded pixellevel information. It has been shown empirically that SSIM
correlated with mutual information [35]. We drop 𝐻 (𝑋) from
our calculations as it is a constant.
Unlike MSE, which only measures pixel-wise differences,
SSIM accounts for luminance, contrast, and structural information, providing a better perceptual measure of image quality.
This makes SSIM a suitable proxy to indicate how much useful
ˆ The SSIM between two
information from 𝑋 is retained in 𝑍.
images 𝑥 and 𝑥ˆ is given by
SSIM(𝑥, 𝑥)
ˆ =

(2𝜇 𝑥 𝜇 𝑥ˆ + 𝑐 1 ) (2𝜎𝑥 𝑥ˆ + 𝑐 2 )
,
(𝜇2𝑥 + 𝜇2𝑥ˆ + 𝑐 1 ) (𝜎𝑥2 + 𝜎𝑥2ˆ + 𝑐 2 )

(29)

where 𝜇 𝑥 and 𝜇 𝑥ˆ are the mean intensities of the original
and reconstructed images, 𝜎𝑥2 and 𝜎𝑥2ˆ are their variances, and
𝜎𝑥 𝑥ˆ is the covariance between them. The constants 𝑐 1 and 𝑐 2
stabilize the division to avoid near-zero values.
The SSIM has a range from -1 and 1, with values closer
to 1 indicating higher structural similarity. By focusing on
perceptual quality rather than pixel-wise differences, we find
that SSIM provides a more accurate measure of the retained
information in the latent representation. Formally, we define
the IRI for a given task-oriented communication system 𝑖 as
IRI𝑖 = SSIM(𝒙, 𝑟 𝛾𝑖 ( 𝒛ˆ )),

(30)

where 𝑟 𝛾𝑖 refers to the reconstructor specifically trained for
system 𝑖.
To compare the different systems fairly, we ensure the
following conditions:

1.0
12

Mutual Information (MINE)

IRI
MINE

0.8

10
8

0.6

IRI

F. Information Retention Index Across Different Methods
To assess how much information 𝑍ˆ retains about input 𝑋, we
ˆ 𝑋), which quantifies the informativeness of the
estimate 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
latent representation 𝑍ˆ for reconstructing the original input 𝑋.
Since direct computation of mutual information is intractable,
we adopt a reconstruction-based proxy [35] to compute the
IRI across different methods.
Assume that the reconstruction loss Lrecon (𝒙| 𝒛ˆ ), parameterized by a reconstructor 𝑟 𝛾 (·) with parameters 𝛾, denotes the
expected error for reconstructing 𝒙 from the latent represenˆ 𝑋) can be bounded as
tation 𝒛ˆ . The mutual information 𝐼 ( 𝑍;
follows:

6

0.4

4
0.2
0.0

2
10 5

10 4

10 3

10 2

10 1

100

0

Figure 4. Comparison of IRI and MINE estimates across
different values of 𝛽 in the VIB objective. Both metrics
exhibit similar trends in retained information, but MINE shows
significantly higher variance. Shaded regions represent the
standard deviation over multiple runs.
• The same decoder architecture is used for each system,

ensuring consistency across the experiments.
• All reconstructors are trained with the same settings and

hyperparameters for the same number of epochs.
• We train all reconstructors on the same training set and to

ensure a valid comparison, we assess the reconstruction
performance on the same testing set.
By comparing the IRI scores on the reconstructed images, we
can capture the information retention across different methods.
The higher the IRI, the more information 𝑍 retains about 𝑋,
allowing us to quantify the informativeness and minimality of
the learned representations. Algorithm 4 provides a detailed
procedure to compute the IRI by leveraging the correlation
between reconstructed and original inputs to approximate
informativeness and minimality.
Although Mutual Information Neural Estimation (MINE) is
a widely-used method for estimating the mutual information
[37], it suffers from several well-documented drawbacks that
limit its effectiveness for benchmarking in semantic communication systems [38]. MINE is prone to high variance,
requires careful tuning of many different hyperparameters, and
scales poorly in high-dimensional latent spaces all of which
can lead to unstable or misleading estimates. These issues
are especially problematic when comparing different models
or compression levels under consistent settings. In contrast,
IRI allows for consistent, fair benchmarking with minimal
assumptions and training overhead. We view IRI as a relative
measure, similar to a diagnostic tool, that enables empirical
analysis of minimality and informativeness in task-oriented
systems. As illustrated in Figure 4, IRI follows the same
general trend as MINE but with substantially reduced variance,
providing a more stable and reliable metric for evaluating
privacy-relevant information retention in 6G-IoT task-oriented
communication systems.
We note that while SSIM is effective in image-based
applications, it is inherently limited to image data. For
non-visual modalities such as text or tabular data, alternative reconstruction-based metrics (e.g., BLEU score) can be
adopted to extend the IRI framework to broader task domains.

10

Algorithm 4 Computing IRI
𝑀 , learning rate 𝜆,
Input: X𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑖𝑛 , X𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 frozen encoders { 𝑓 𝜃𝑖 }𝑖=1
𝜅 (SNR)
Output: IRI for each system 𝑖
𝑀
1: Initialize reconstructors {𝑟 𝛾𝑖 } 𝑖=1
2: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑀 do
3:
Freeze 𝜃 𝑖
4:
while not converged do
5:
Sample (𝒙, 𝒚) ∼ X𝑡𝑟 𝑎𝑖𝑛
6:
𝒛 ← 𝑓 𝜃𝑖 (𝒙)
2
7:
𝒏 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 I), 𝜎 2 ← E[ ∥𝒛 1𝜅∥ ]
10 10
8:
𝒛ˆ 1 ← 𝒛 1 + 𝒏
9:
𝒙ˆ ← 𝑟 𝛾𝑖 ( 𝒛ˆ1 )
10:
Lrecon ← ∥𝒙 − 𝒙ˆ ∥ 2
11:
𝛾𝑖 ← 𝛾𝑖 − 𝜆 rec ∇𝛾𝑖 Lrecon
12:
end while
13: end for
14: for 𝑖 = 1 to 𝑀 do
15:
Sample (𝒙, 𝒚) ∼ X𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡
16:
𝒛 ← 𝑓 𝜃𝑖 (𝒙)
2
17:
𝒏 ∼ N (0, 𝜎 2 I), 𝜎 2 ← E[ ∥𝒛 1𝜅∥ ]
10 10
18:
𝒛ˆ 1 ← 𝒛 1 + 𝒏
19:
𝒙ˆ ← 𝑟 𝛾𝑖 ( 𝒛ˆ1 )
20:
IRI𝑖 ← SSIM(𝒙, 𝒙ˆ )
21: end for

VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATIONS AND D ISCUSSION
In this section, we present the experimental setup used
to evaluate CLAD. We use image classification as a representative task to illustrate the core concept of the proposed
methods, developing an end-to-end learning framework that
extracts low-dimensional, task-relevant, privacy-preserving,
and channel-robust latent representations for trustworthy 6GIoT applications. Importantly, the proposed framework is not
limited to image classification alone. We start by describing the
datasets used in our experiments, followed by a discussion of
the baseline methods, neural architectures, and the experimental setup. Finally, we present detailed evaluations and analysis
of the results.1 .
A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: The Colored MNIST and Colored FashionMNIST datasets are extensions of the standard MNIST [39] and
FashionMNIST [40] datasets, each consisting of 60,000 28x28
grayscale images. In Colored MNIST, handwritten digits (0-9)
are overlaid on colored backgrounds, while in Colored FashionMNIST, clothing items from 10 categories (e.g., T-shirts,
coats, shoes) are similarly displayed on colored backgrounds.
The introduction of background colors adds additional taskirrelevant information, creating a more challenging setup for
the model to disentangle task-relevant features relevant to
classifying digits or clothing items from background-related
attributes. Furthermore, incorporating background color labels
enables the evaluation of attribute inference attacks, where an
1 The
source code, models
https://github.com/OmarErak/CLAD

and

results

are

available

at

adversary is trained to predict background color. This setup
provides insight into the model’s ability to protect against
such attacks while maintaining disentanglement between taskrelevant and task-irrelevant features. To further evaluate the
scalability and robustness of the proposed method on more
complex and natural datasets, we also incorporate CIFAR-10
[41]. CIFAR-10 consists of 60,000 32x32 color images in 10
classes, including airplanes, cars, birds, cats, and other natural objects. Compared to MNIST-based datasets, CIFAR-10
introduces significantly more visual variability and semantic
richness, making it a more challenging benchmark.
2) Neural Network Architectures: To simulate realistic 6GIoT scenarios, we adopt deep neural network (DNN) architectures for both the task-relevant encoder at the transmitter
and the downstream classifier at the receiver. These networks consist of convolutional and fully connected layers,
structured around a latent dimension 𝑑. The encoder and
classifier architectures, outlined in Table II and Table IV,
are used consistently across all evaluated methods to ensure
fair and reproducible comparisons. To compute the IRI, we
additionally employ reconstructor networks that attempt to
recover the original input 𝒙 from the latent representation
𝒛ˆ . The architectures for these reconstructors are provided in
Table III and Table V, and are applied uniformly across all
methods during IRI evaluation.
3) Channel Conditions: We evaluate the performance of
CLAD compared to baseline methods using an AWGN channel model due to its widespread adoption. Specifically, we
consider training and testing the models at identical SNRs,
ranging from -6 dB to 12 dB. This setting allows us to assess
the robustness of each method across different noise levels
in a controlled manner. For each SNR value, we train the
models over multiple runs and average the results to mitigate
any randomness introduced during training. In the following
experiments, we simulate a constrained wireless edge scenario
by setting the channel bandwidth to 12.5kHz and the symbol
rate to 9,600 baud, reflecting practical limitations in edge
communication environments.
B. Baselines
In our experiments, we compare the proposed method
CLAD against three baselines: DeepJSCC [14], VIB and
[13], [16] and information bottleneck and adversarial learning
(IBAL) [20]. These methods provide a benchmark for taskoriented communication systems, helping to evaluate the effectiveness of our approach in terms of privacy and downstream
task performance.
1) DeepJSCC: DeepJSCC is a neural network-based approach that optimizes the encoding of data for transmission
over noisy channels. For our task-oriented scenario, DeepJSCC
is trained with cross-entropy loss for classification rather
than reconstruction, and it does not explicitly discard taskirrelevant information. As a result, it serves as a baseline for
how well the encoded representation performs without feature
disentanglement.
2) Variational Information Bottleneck (VIB): The VIB
framework aims to compress the input 𝑋 into latent representation 𝑍 while retaining sufficient information for predicting

11

𝑌 . VIB balances 𝐼 (𝑍; 𝑋) and 𝐼 (𝑍; 𝑌 ) via hyperparameter 𝛽.
In our experiments, we provide results for different values of
𝛽 to illustrate how varying the trade-off between compression
and task relevance impacts task performance, IRI, and privacy.
The Variational Feature Encoding (VFE) method in [13] is
based on VIB, and therefore the VIB results presented are
synonymous to VFE.
3) Information Bottleneck and Adversarial Learning
(IBAL): IBAL is a task-oriented semantic communication
approach that modifies the traditional VIB objective by
incorporating an additional distortion constraint. Specifically,
IBAL optimizes a composite loss function that balances the
original variational information bottleneck objective with
an MSE term that is maximized, which encourages poor
reconstructions and thereby enhances resistance to model
inversion attacks.
By benchmarking against these three baselines, we show
that CLAD more effectively extracts task-relevant features,
suppresses task-irrelevant information, enhances downstream
classification performance, and offers stronger privacy guarantees.
TABLE II. DNN Structure for the transmitter (encoder) and
the receiver (classifier) used for Colored MNIST and FashionMNIST
Layer

Output
dimensions

Transmitter

Conv Layer+ReLU

32 × 28 × 28

MaxPool Layer

32 × 14 × 14

Conv Layer+ReLU

64 × 14 × 14

MaxPool Layer

64 × 7 × 7

Fully Connected (Flatten)

𝑑

Fully Connected (FC)

512

Fully Connected (FC)

256

Fully Connected + Softmax

10

TABLE IV. DNN structure for the transmitter (encoder) and
the receiver (classifier) used for CIFAR-10
Output

Layer

Dimensions

Transmitter

Receiver

Conv + ReLU × 2

128 × 32 × 32

ResNet Block

128 × 16 × 16

Conv + ReLU × 2

4×4×4

Reshape + FC + Tanh

𝑑

FC + ReLU + Reshape

64 × 4 × 4

Conv + ReLU × 2

512 × 4 × 4

ResNet Block

512 × 4 × 4

Pooling Layer

512

FC + Softmax

10

TABLE V. Architecture settings for the reconstructors used
with CIFAR-10 to evaluate IRI
Output

Layer name

dimensions

Reconstructor

Fully Connected (FC) + ReLU

512 × 4 × 4

Deconv (512→256) + ReLU

256 × 8 × 8

Deconv (256→128) + ReLU

128 × 16 × 16

Deconv (128→64) + ReLU

64 × 32 × 32

Conv (64→3) + Sigmoid

3 × 32 × 32

1) Task Performance (Accuracy): The primary evaluation
metric for task performance is classification accuracy. It measures the ability of classifier to predict the label 𝒚 from
𝒛ˆ. Accuracy is calculated as the ratio of correctly classified
instances to the total number of instances:
𝑁

Receiver

TABLE III. Architecture settings for the reconstructors used
with Colored MNIST and FashionMNIST to evaluate IRI
Layer name

Output
dimensions

Reconstructor

Fully Connected (FC)

128 × 7 × 7

Deconv Layer + ReLU

64 × 14 × 14

Deconv Layer + ReLU

32 × 28 × 28

Deconv Layer + ReLU

16 × 28 × 28

Deconv Layer + Sigmoid

3 × 28 × 28

C. Evaluation Metrics
To assess the effectiveness of CLAD, we employ four
key evaluation metrics: classification accuracy for task performance, IRI, attribute inference attack accuracy, and model
inversion attacks for privacy assessment. Furthermore, all
methods are evaluated across a range of channel SNRs to examine their robustness under dynamic transmission conditions.

Accuracy =

1 ∑︁
1( 𝑦ˆ 𝑖 = 𝑦 𝑖 ),
𝑁 𝑖=1

(31)

where 𝑁 is the total number of samples, 𝑦ˆ 𝑖 is the predicted
label, and 𝑦 𝑖 is the ground truth label.
2) Information Retention Index (IRI): To quantify the
amount of information retained in the encoded representaˆ we use our proposed method to compute the IRI.
tion 𝑍,
This measures how much information from the input 𝑋 is
ˆ which helps assess
present in the encoded representation 𝑍,
the compression of the representation. By comparing IRI
across different methods, we can evaluate how effectively each
method discards task-irrelevant information.
3) Attribute Inference Attack: In addition to task performance and information retention, we also evaluate privacy by
comparing the vulnerability of different methods to attribute
inference attacks. An attribute inference attack aims to recover
sensitive or irrelevant information about the input, such as
background color, from the encoded representation 𝒛ˆ .
Given the encoded representation 𝒛ˆ , the adversary seeks
to predict the background color of the image. If 𝒛ˆ contains
significant task-irrelevant information, the adversary will be
able to classify the background color with high accuracy. To
evaluate this, we train a background color classifier (with the
same architecture as the task relevant classifier in Table II)
on the encoded representation 𝒛ˆ and report its classification

12

99

92

98

94
93

CLAD
VIB ( = 0.001)
DeepJSCC
IBAL

92
91
6

4

2

0

2

4

6

SNR/dB

8

10

88
86
84

CLAD
VIB ( = 0.001)
DeepJSCC
IBAL

82
80

12

6

4

2

0

(a)

2

4

SNR/dB

6

8

10

Accuracy (%)

95

Accuracy (%)

Accuracy (%)

96

90

92

90

97

90
88
86

CLAD
VIB ( = 0.001)
DeepJSCC
IBAL

84

12

6

4

2

0

(b)

2

4

6

SNR/dB

8

10

12

(c)

Figure 5. Accuracy at different SNRs for (a) the Colored MNIST dataset, (b) the Colored FashionMNIST dataset and (c) the
CIFAR-10 dataset .

0.030
0.025
0.020

0.12

CLAD
VIB ( = 0.001)
DeepJSCC
IBAL

0.11
0.10
0.09

CLAD
VIB ( = 0.001)
DeepJSCC
IBAL

0.11

Error Rate(%)

0.035

Error Rate(%)

Error Rate(%)

0.12

CLAD
VIB ( = 0.001)
DeepJSCC
IBAL

0.040

0.10
0.09
0.08

0.015

0.08
2

4

6

8

Latency (ms)

(a)

10

12

2

4

6

8

Latency (ms)

10

12

2

(b)

4

6

8

Latency (ms)

10

12

(c)

Figure 6. Rate-distortion curves for (a) the Colored MNIST dataset, (b) the Colored FashionMNIST dataset and (c) the CIFAR10 dataset. SNR is set to 12dB.

accuracy. A higher accuracy in the attribute inference attack
implies more task-irrelevant information is retained in 𝒛ˆ ,
indicating weaker privacy guarantees.
4) Model Inversion Attack: To further evaluate privacy
leakage, we consider model inversion attacks, which aim
to reconstruct the original input data 𝒙 from the encoded
representation 𝒛ˆ . This type of attack simulates an adversary
that gains access to the transmitted latent representation and
trains a decoder to recover the input image. In our setup,
we follow a black-box attack scenario, where the adversary
does not have access to the encoder or its training data.
Specifically, we split the dataset such that 4/5 of the data is
used to train and test the encoder and classifier models, while
the remaining 1/5 is reserved for training the adversary. The
adversary learns a mapping from 𝒛ˆ to the corresponding input
image using only this held-out subset. A visually accurate
reconstruction indicates that 𝒛ˆ still encodes significant lowlevel input features, implying weaker privacy preservation.
Similar to [20], we use SSIM as a performance measure for
the model inversion attacks.
D. Results and Analysis
In this subsection we thoroughly analyze and discuss the
performance of the proposed method CLAD against the three
baselines, DeepJSCC, VIB, and IBAL on all three aforementioned datasets.
1) Task-Oriented Classification Performance: We begin by
evaluating the classification accuracy of each method at a
fixed SNR of 12 dB under a latency constraint of 𝑡 ≤ 6.67

TABLE VI. Evaluation of different methods on Colored
MNIST dataset at SNR = 12 dB, under a latency constraint of
𝑡 ≤ 6.67 ms.
Classification
Method

Adversarial
IRI

Accuracy (%)

Accuracy (%)

DeepJSCC

97.96

0.608

79.16

VIB (Beta=0.0001)

98.01

0.3931

52.12

VIB (Beta=0.001)

97.90

0.1931

34.09

VIB (Beta=0.01)

96.93

0.0608

22.96

VIB (Beta=0.1)

93.29

0.0342

17.56

VIB (Beta=1)

11.36

0.0123

13.52

IBAL

97.63

0.1762

29.86

CLAD (Ours)

98.42

0.039

19.83

ms. The latency constraint can also be seen as an encoded
feature vector with a maximum of 64 dimension. Tables VI,
VII, and VIII summarize the results for Colored MNIST,
Colored FashionMNIST, and CIFAR-10, respectively. CLAD
consistently achieves the highest accuracy across all datasets,
outperforming DeepJSCC, VIB (across various 𝛽 values), and
IBAL.
For instance, on Colored MNIST, CLAD achieves 98.42%
accuracy, surpassing DeepJSCC (97.96%) and the bestperforming VIB configuration (98.01%) with better privacy
metrics. On Colred FashionMNIST, CLAD outperforms all

13

IRI
Accuracy (%)

DeepJSCC

89.28

Accuracy (%)
0.5958

79.52

VIB (Beta=0.0001)

90.02

0.3172

58.03

VIB (Beta=0.001)

89.30

0.2562

47.00

VIB (Beta=0.01)

86.98

0.0707

23.55

VIB (Beta=0.1)

81.82

0.0497

17.06

VIB (Beta=1)

11.28

0.0101

12.82

IBAL

89.15

0.1842

32.06

CLAD (Ours)

91.74

0.0587

19.33

TABLE VIII. Evaluation of different methods on CIFAR10
dataset at SNR = 12 dB, under a latency constraint of 𝑡 ≤ 6.67
ms.
Classification
Method

IRI
Accuracy (%)

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

91.21

0.2043

VIB (Beta=0.0001)

91.78

0.1843

VIB (Beta=0.001)

91.49

0.1132

VIB (Beta=0.01)

86.42

0.0456

VIB (Beta=0.1)

78.31

0.0321

VIB (Beta=1)

9.67

0.0092

IBAL

91.32

0.0876

CLAD (Ours)

92.33

0.0471

other baselines by 1.50-3.00%. On the more complex CIFAR10 dataset, CLAD achieves 92.33%, outperforming DeepJSCC
by 1.12% and VIB (𝛽 = 0.001) by 0.84%.
We further evaluate classification robustness under dynamic
transmission scenarios. As shown in Fig. 5, CLAD maintains
higher accuracy across all SNR levels from -6 dB to 12 dB.
This robustness is particularly crucial in 6G-IoT environments,
where channel conditions fluctuate and low-latency, on-device
inference is essential.
2) Rate-Distortion Tradeoff under Latency Constraints: In
real-time 6G-IoT systems, minimizing latency while maintaining high task performance is critical. Since communication
latency in our setup is determined by the dimension of the
ˆ which is fixed across methods,
transmitted feature vector 𝑍,
we assess how efficiently each method encodes task-relevant
information within that constraint.
Fig. 6 shows the rate-distortion curves, where distortion
corresponds to classification error and rate is reflected by the
latency budget. Despite identical feature vector sizes, CLAD
consistently achieves lower distortion. This indicates that
CLAD produces more compact and informative semantic representations by focusing on preserving task-relevant features,

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.0

CLAD
VIB
IBAL
DeepJSCC
CLAD
VIB
IBAL
DeepJSCC

0.1

0.1
6

4

2

0

2

4

SNR (dB)

6

8

10

12

0.0

(a) Model inversion and attribute inference attacks at varying
SNR.
0.7

0.8

0.6

0.7
0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

CLAD
VIB
IBAL
DeepJSCC
CLAD
VIB
IBAL
DeepJSCC

0.1

0.1
0.0

DeepJSCC

Model Inversion Attack SSIM

Method

0.6

0.7

Model Inversion Attack SSIM

Adversarial

Attribute Inference Attack Accuracy

Classification

0.8

Attribute Inference Attack Accuracy

TABLE VII. Evaluation of different methods on Colored
FashionMNIST dataset at SNR = 12 dB, under a latency
constraint of 𝑡 ≤ 6.67 ms.

2

4

6

8

Latency (ms)

10

12

0.0

(b) Model inversion and attribute inference attacks under
varying latencies with SNR = 12dB.

Figure 7. Privacy evaluation comparing CLAD, VIB, IBAL,
and DeepJSCC across different settings on the Colored
MNIST dataset.
as a result, CLAD achieves superior downstream accuracy
under the same latency constraints, yielding a more favorable
rate-distortion tradeoff. This makes it particularly well-suited
for efficient, privacy-aware communication in latency-sensitive
6G-IoT applications.
3) Privacy Evaluation: Information Retention, Attribute Inference, and Model Inversion: Privacy is critical for trustworthy communication in 6G-IoT systems, particularly when
transmitting semantically rich representations over shared or
noisy channels. To assess this, we evaluate how well each
method limits task-irrelevant information leakage under varying conditions and attacks.
IRI and Attribute Inference. From Tables VI , VII and
VIII, CLAD achieves the lowest IRI and attribute inference
accuracy across all methods and datasets. On Colored MNIST,
CLAD reaches an IRI of 0.039 and adversarial accuracy of
19.83%, significantly outperforming DeepJSCC (IRI of 0.608,
adversarial accuracy 79.16%) and VIB (ranging from 0.3931
to 0.0123 in IRI as 𝛽 increases). While higher 𝛽 values in
VIB reduce information retention and adversarial success, they
also degrade task accuracy dropping to 93.29% at 𝛽 = 0.1 and
11.36% at 𝛽 = 1. In contrast, CLAD maintains both privacy
and classification accuracy (98.42%). IBAL provides a lower
IRI (0.1762) and adversarial accuracy compared to the best
performing VIB results, however CLAD outperforms it in both
privacy and task performance.

14

(a) Colored MNIST Reconstructions
(a) t-SNE embedding for DeepJSCC

(b) Colored Fashion MNIST Reconstructions
(b) t-SNE embedding for CLAD

Figure 8. 2-dimensional t-SNE embeddings of the received
feature representations for the Colored FashionMNIST classification task at SNR = 12 dB.
Similarly, on Colored FashionMNIST, CLAD achieves an
IRI of 0.0587 and attribute inference accuracy of 19.33%,
outperforming VIB (0.2562 IRI and 47.00% inference accuracy at 𝛽 = 0.001) and DeepJSCC (0.5958 IRI, 79.52%
attribute inference accuracy). IBAL shows a decent privacy
tradeoff (IRI 0.1762, inference 29.86% on MNIST), but CLAD
surpasses it in both privacy and task performance. On the more
complex dataset, CIFAR10, a similar trend is seen, as CLAD
provides the best task accuracy and lowest IRI compared to
all other baselines.
Privacy vs. SNR and Latency. The impact of varying SNR
and latency on privacy is illustrated in Fig. 7. In Fig. 7a,
attribute inference success increases with SNR for all methods, as better channel conditions enhance signal fidelity, but
CLAD consistently maintains the lowest inference accuracy
and model inversion SSIM. For instance, at 12 dB, DeepJSCC
shows attribute inference accuracy above 75% and SSIM
exceeding 0.6, while CLAD remains below attribute inference

Figure 9. Reconstructed images from the received feature
representations under different methods.
accuracy 25% and under 0.05 SSIM. IBAL and VIB offer
intermediate privacy performance, but are sitll outperformed
by CLAD. Fig. 7b presents a comparison of privacy across
different latency levels at a fixed SNR of 12 dB. Across all latency settings, CLAD consistently achieves the lowest attribute
inference accuracy and SSIM, indicating strong resistance to
both attacks.
4) Visual Analysis and Qualitative Comparisons: In addition to numerical metrics, Fig. 9 presents reconstructed images
under each method. CLAD effectively removes stylistic and
task-irrelevant details (e.g., color, background texture), focusing on shape and structure relevant for classification. VIB and
IBAL reconstructions are blurrier, while DeepJSCC retains
vivid background and texture details, making it vulnerable
to inference attacks. These visual insights further support
the quantitative findings. Furthermore, Fig. 8 shows a 2D tSNE visualization of the encoded features for the Colored
FashionMNIST dataset. The embeddings produced by CLAD
result in more compact and clearly separated class clusters
compared to DeepJSCC, indicating better task relevance and
intra-class consistency. In contrast, DeepJSCC features show
more overlap and spread.

15

VII. C ONCLUSIONS
We proposed CLAD, a task-oriented communication framework that combines contrastive learning and adversarial disentanglement to extract compact, task-relevant features while improving privacy. By reducing task-irrelevant information in the
latent space, CLAD enhances downstream performance and
strengthens resistance to attribute inference and model inversion attacks. We also introduced the IRI, a practical and reproducible metric for comparing information preservation across
methods. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets and
channel conditions demonstrate that CLAD outperforms stateof-the-art baselines in terms of task accuracy, privacy, and
minimality of representation, making it a suitable solution for
semantic communication in 6G-IoT systems. Future work may
explore extending CLAD to more complex input modalities
and dynamically adaptive scenarios where task relevance can
shift over time.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” The Bell
Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948.
[2] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A vision of 6G wireless systems:
Applications, trends, technologies, and open research problems,” IEEE
Netw., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, 2020.
[3] M. Giordani, M. Polese, M. Mezzavilla, S. Rangan, and M. Zorzi,
“Toward 6G networks: Use cases and technologies,” IEEE Commun.
Mag, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 55–61, 2020.
[4] A. Voulodimos, N. Doulamis, A. Doulamis, and E. Protopapadakis,
“Deep learning for computer vision: A brief review,” Comput. Intell.
Neuroscience, vol. 2018, no. 1, p. 7068349, 2018.
[5] I. Yaqoob, L. U. Khan, S. A. Kazmi, M. Imran, N. Guizani, and
C. S. Hong, “Autonomous driving cars in smart cities: Recent advances,
requirements, and challenges,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 174–181,
2019.
[6] T. Andrade and D. Bastos, “Extended reality in iot scenarios: Concepts,
applications and future trends,” in 2019 5th Experiment Int. Conf. (exp.
at’19). IEEE, 2019, pp. 107–112.
[7] L. Bariah, Q. Zhao, H. Zou, Y. Tian, F. Bader, and M. Debbah, “Large
generative AI models for telecom: The next big thing?” IEEE Commun.
Mag., pp. 1–7, 2024.
[8] D. Gündüz, Z. Qin, I. Estella Aguerri, H. S. Dhillon, Z. Yang, A. Yener,
K. K. Wong, and C.-B. Chae, “Guest editorial special issue on beyond
transmitting bits: Context, semantics, and task-oriented communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 1–4, 2023.
[9] Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, D. Wen, Y. Wu, C. Jiang, and K. B. Letaief, “Taskoriented communications for 6G: Vision, principles, and technologies,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 78–85, 2023.
[10] Y. Mehmood, F. Ahmad, I. Yaqoob, A. Adnane, M. Imran, and
S. Guizani, “Internet-of-things-based smart cities: Recent advances and
challenges,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 16–24, 2017.
[11] Q. Mao, F. Hu, and Q. Hao, “Deep learning for intelligent wireless
networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 20,
no. 4, pp. 2595–2621, 2018.
[12] O. Erak and H. Abou-Zeid, “Accelerating and compressing deep neural
networks for massive mimo csi feedback,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), 2023, pp. 1029–1035.
[13] J. Shao, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Learning task-oriented communication
for edge inference: An information bottleneck approach,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 197–211, 2021.
[14] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. B. Kurka, and D. Gündüz, “Deep joint sourcechannel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cogn.
Commun. Netw, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, 2019.
[15] S. Xie, S. Ma, M. Ding, Y. Shi, M. Tang, and Y. Wu, “Robust information
bottleneck for task-oriented communication with digital modulation,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 2577–2591, 2023.
[16] A. A. Alemi, I. Fischer, J. V. Dillon, and K. Murphy, “Deep variational
information bottleneck,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017.
[17] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.

[18] B. Paige, J.-W. Van De Meent, A. Desmaison, N. Goodman, P. Kohli,
F. Wood, P. Torr et al., “Learning disentangled representations with semisupervised deep generative models,” Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
[19] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck
method,” arXiv preprint physics/0004057, 2000.
[20] Y. Wang, S. Guo, Y. Deng, H. Zhang, and Y. Fang, “Privacy-preserving
task-oriented semantic communications against model inversion attacks,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., 2024.
[21] M. Fredrikson, S. Jha, and T. Ristenpart, “Model inversion attacks that
exploit confidence information and basic countermeasures,” in Proc.
ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2015, pp. 1322–1333.
[22] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc of the 37th
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020.
[23] Y. Tian, C. Sun, B. Poole, D. Krishnan, C. Schmid, and P. Isola, “What
makes for good views for contrastive learning?” Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 6827–6839, 2020.
[24] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, K. Swersky, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “Big
self-supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners,” Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 22 243–22 255, 2020.
[25] P. Khosla, P. Teterwak, C. Wang, A. Sarna, Y. Tian, P. Isola,
A. Maschinot, C. Liu, and D. Krishnan, “Supervised contrastive learning,” Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 18 661–18 673,
2020.
[26] I. Higgins, L. Matthey, A. Pal, C. P. Burgess, X. Glorot, M. M.
Botvinick, S. Mohamed, and A. Lerchner, “beta-vae: Learning basic
visual concepts with a constrained variational framework.” Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations (Poster), vol. 3, 2017.
[27] H. Kim and A. Mnih, “Disentangling by factorising,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 2649–2658.
[28] E. H. Sanchez, M. Serrurier, and M. Ortner, “Learning disentangled
representations via mutual information estimation,” in Proc. ECCV.
Springer, 2020, pp. 205–221.
[29] Z. Pan, L. Niu, J. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Disentangled information
bottleneck,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 35, no. 10, 2021, pp. 9285–9293.
[30] L. Sun, Y. Yang, M. Chen, and C. Guo, “Disentangled information
bottleneck guided privacy-protective joint source and channel coding
for image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Commun., pp. 1–1, 2024.
[31] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,”
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 27, 2014.
[32] I. Fischer, “The conditional entropy bottleneck,” Entropy, vol. 22, no. 9,
p. 999, 2020.
[33] R. Shokri, M. Stronati, C. Song, and V. Shmatikov, “Membership
inference attacks against machine learning models,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
Secur. Privacy (SP). IEEE, 2017, pp. 3–18.
[34] R. Yeung, “A new outlook on shannon’s information measures,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 466–474, 1991.
[35] R. D. Hjelm, A. Fedorov, S. Lavoie-Marchildon, K. Grewal, P. Bachman,
A. Trischler, and Y. Bengio, “Learning deep representations by mutual
information estimation and maximization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2019.
[36] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.
[37] M. I. Belghazi, A. Baratin, S. Rajeswar, S. Ozair, Y. Bengio,
A. Courville, and R. D. Hjelm, “Mine: mutual information neural
estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.04062, 2018.
[38] J. Song and S. Ermon, “Understanding the limitations of variational
mutual information estimators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06222, 2019.
[39] L. Deng, “The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine
learning research [best of the web],” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 29,
no. 6, pp. 141–142, 2012.
[40] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, “Fashion-MNIST: a novel image
dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” 2017.
[41] A. Krizhevsky, G. Hinton et al., “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” 2009.

