IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

6259

Disentangled Information Bottleneck Guided
Multidevice Cooperative Task-Oriented
Semantic Communication
Meiyu Sun , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Dapeng Wu , Senior Member, IEEE,
Puning Zhang , Member, IEEE, and Ruyan Wang
Abstract—While multi-device cooperative task-oriented semantic communication (TOSC) enhances task performance through
comprehensive information representation, it inevitably introduces redundancy, thereby increasing communication overhead.
Existing redundancy elimination methods suffer from limitations
in interpretability and coarse granularity, hindering the optimal
utilization of communication resources. To this end, we propose
a disentangled information bottleneck guided TOSC framework
(DisenIB-TOSC). The framework first employs the basic IB
for initial feature compression, then formulates a novel DisenIB specifically designed for multi-device cooperation inference,
which enhances task performance and achieves interpretable
feature disentanglement by separating features into common and
private components, thereby establishing a theoretical foundation
for redundancy identification. Subsequently, we derive differentiable, computationally tractable forms for both IB objectives
by combining variational approximation, consistency constraints,
and density ratio trick. Leveraging the disentangled features, we
further design a feature importance-aware selective transmission
strategy, DisenIB-TOSC-ST, which quantifies feature importance
via mutual information estimation to dynamically discriminate
and control redundant feature transmission. Experimental results
on several tasks demonstrate that our method outperforms
baselines in task performance while reducing communication
costs, verifying the effectiveness and interpretability of feature
disentanglement.
Index Terms—Task-oriented semantic communication, multidevice cooperation, disentanglement, information bottleneck.
Received 12 August 2025; revised 27 November 2025 and 11 January 2026;
accepted 4 March 2026. Date of publication 18 March 2026; date of current
version 26 March 2026. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant U24A20211, Grant 62271096, and
Grant U20A20157, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing,
China under Grant CSTB2023NSCQ-LZX0134 and Grant CSTB2024NSCQLZX0124, in part by the University Innovation Research Group of Chongqing
under Grant CXQT20017, in part by Youth Innovation Group Support
Program of ICE Discipline of CQUPT under Grant SCIE-QN-2022-04,
in part by the Chongqing Postdoctoral Research Program Special Grant
under Grant 2023CQBSHTB3092, in part by the Science and Technology
Research Program of Chongqing Municipal Education Commission under
Grant KJQN202400628, and in part by the Innovative Talent Program for
Doctoral Students of Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
under Grant BYJS202417. The associate editor coordinating the review of
this article and approving it for publication was R. K. Mallik. (Corresponding
author: Dapeng Wu.)
The authors are with the School of Communications and Information Engineering, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing
400065, China, and also with the Advanced Network and Intelligent Connection Technology Key Laboratory of Chongqing Education Commission
of China, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Sensing and Networking, Chongqing 400065, China (e-mail: s200101146@stu.cqupt.edu.cn;
wudp@cqupt.edu.cn; zhangpn@cqupt.edu.cn; wangry@cqupt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2026.3675469

I. I NTRODUCTION
S THE next-generation intelligent digital infrastructure,
6G networks are rapidly evolving through convergence
with artificial intelligence (AI), big data, and edge computing, heralding the era of ubiquitous intelligent connectivity
[1], [2]. Large-scale deployed infrastructures and diverse
intelligent applications inject new vitality into 6G networks,
while exacerbating spectrum scarcity, potentially hindering the
advancement of 6G intelligent communications.
Combined with the potential of AI on edge devices,
task-oriented semantic communication (TOSC) has emerged
as a novel paradigm [3], [4], [5]. Utilizing deep learning
(DL)-based semantic coding and joint source-channel coding (JSCC), TOSC extracts and transmits only task-relevant
semantic information rather than raw data [6], [7], which
ensures task performance while reducing communication
overhead under resource-constrained scenarios. Consequently,
TOSC enables the evolution from conventional data-driven
communication networks to semantic-aware networks, potentially alleviating the scarcity of communication resources
while meeting the intelligent demands of 6G [8], [9], [10].
Despite the aforementioned advantages, in uplink edge
network scenarios where a edge device collaborates with an
edge server to execute tasks, the island effect and limited
sensing capability of edge device constrain task inference
performance. Specifically, the island effect refers to a single
device operating independently, it cannot fully capture sensing
information due to factors like occlusion and distance, and also
struggles to share information with other devices. Meanwhile,
its limited computing power hinders the accurate extraction of
semantic features, ultimately limiting inference accuracy [11],
[12]. Practically, the objects can be sensed collaboratively by
multiple edge devices, e.g., distributed smart cameras or drone
clusters capturing multi-view images [13], and autonomous
vehicles perceiving road conditions via radar-camera collaboration [14]. Studies demonstrate that multi-device cooperative
sensing enables multi-dimensional characterization of raw
data, boosting performance in tasks such as multi-view object
recognition and retrieval, which has been widely adopted
in smart cities, intelligent transportation, and smart security
[15], [16], [17]. However, an increased number of devices
introduces excessive information redundancy, while physical
environment and device characteristics lead to significant vari-

A

0090-6778 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6260

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

ations in sensed data quality, indiscriminately transmitting all
semantic information thus incurs substantial communication
overhead. Thus, it is critical to investigate enhancing task
performance while optimizing communication resource utilization in wireless edge networks. In other words, we need to
identify which information is effective and which is redundant,
thereby eliminating redundancy to achieve a trade-off between
performance and costs.
A. Related Works and Motivations
The study in [18] first proposed the application of DL
to model end-to-end communication links. Subsequently,
researchers developed DeepJSCC to map extracted semantic
information to wireless channel-adapted semantic symbols
[19], and then reconstructed text, images, speech, or video
sources [20], [21], [22], [23]. With advancing research,
DeepJSCC-based TOSC was extended to multi-modal, multitask, and multi-user systems [24], [25], [26]. Researchers
also explored TOSC from multiple perspectives, including
large model-assisted knowledge enhancement, digital semantic communication integrating quantization and modulation,
security/privacy, etc., [27], [28], and [29].
For the TOSC system performance, the core objective
is to maximize information compression while preserving
downstream task performance. Coincidently, the information
bottleneck (IB), an information-theoretic approach, and its
multiple variants (e.g., deep variational IB (Deep VIB), multiview IB (MIB), and distributed IB (DIB)) offer an elegant
balance between data compression and information preservation, enhancing feature representation [30], [31], [32], [33].
Building on this, existing studies [34], [35], [36], [37] have
incorporated IB into TOSC. Shao et al. [34] first demonstrated IB’s superiority over basic DeepJSCC in rate-distortion
tradeoffs. Sun et al. [35] proposed an adaptive IB objective
with dynamic weight adjustment to guide image transmission.
Li et al. [36] developed a graph-based IB to remove redundancy in graph data. Xie et al. [37] enhanced robustness
against dynamic channel conditions via a robust IB. These
works addressed the computational complexity of mutual
information (MI) terms in high-dimensional feature spaces
by deriving variational bounds of IB objectives. However,
they are primarily confined to single-device scenarios, without
considering identifying cross-device feature correlations or
global redundancy elimination, which is not applicable to
multi-device cooperative TOSC systems.
Recent works [38], [39], [40], [41] have focused on eliminating information redundancy for multi-device cooperative
inference. Liu et al. [38] designed an attention-based compression network to control redundant feature transmission
in multi-view data. Similarly, Choi et al. [39] introduced
a likelihood estimation-based context-aware and weighted
average cooperative transmission scheme, effectively reducing
both communication and computational costs. In IB theory
applications, Aguerri et al. [33] proposed DIB for distributed
sources, enabling redundancy elimination prior to transmission. Subsequently, Shao et al. [40] introduced IB and DIB
into multi-device cooperative image inference, using them

to guide local feature extraction at edge devices and distributed feature encoding across devices, respectively. Further,
Shao et al. [41] investigated multi-device cooperative video
analysis, leveraging IB theory and a temporal entropy model
to remove video redundancies in spatial and temporal domains,
respectively. While these studies achieved cross-device feature
compression and filtering, they lack the interpretability of
redundancy information, i.e., which features are redundant?
Such an understanding is critical for effective elimination.
Feature disentanglement is a core concept in representation learning that decomposes high-dimensional features into
independent, interpretable subspaces, each corresponding to a
latent semantic component in raw data. It is widely adopted
in unsupervised cross-modal clustering [42], supervised multimodal tasks [43], and multi-view learning [44], as these
tasks require information complementarity and feature sharing
among multiple participants. Thus, a key insight is that multidevice cooperation can separate common and private features,
enabling clearer discrimination of how features contribute
to task performance gains. Concurrently, recent studies have
integrated IB theory to guide disentanglement, proposing DisenIB objective that minimizes MI between two features [45],
[46]. Building on this, DisenIB can be employed to guide
feature decoupling in multi-device data [47]. However, existing
work on feature disentanglement for TOSC remains extremely
limited, and research integrating them with feature selective
transmission has yet to emerge.
B. Contributions
To address the above challenges, this paper proposes a
DisenIB guided TOSC (DisenIB-TOSC) method that innovatively leverages feature disentanglement to tackle the inherent
tradeoff between task performance and communication costs
in multi-device cooperative inference scenarios. The contributions are as follows:
• We design a multi-device cooperative TOSC framework
with both IB theory-based optimization objectives. It
pioneeringly achieves multi-device feature disentanglement, overcoming the limitations of existing redundancy
elimination methods in interpretability and coarse granularity. Specifically, in the local feature extraction, the
basic IB guides edge devices to initially compress features while preserving task-relevant information. In the
global JSCC encoding, a novel DisenIB objective for
multi-device cooperation is formulated to guarantee cooperative task performance, while decomposing encoded
features into common (shared across devices) and private
(device-specific) components, enabling systematic and
fine-grained redundancy identification and elimination.
• To address the challenges of MI computation in highdimensional spaces and distributed feature optimization
in multi-device cooperative inference, we propose efficient and tractable solutions for optimization objectives.
Specifically, for the basic IB and DisenIB’s task performance term, we derive differentiable bounds via
variational approximation. For the DisenIB’s disentanglement term, we employ consistency constraints with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: DISENTANGLED INFORMATION BOTTLENECK GUIDED MULTIDEVICE COOPERATIVE TOSC

6261

Fig. 1. The multi-device cooperative TOSC system model.

the density ratio trick by minimizing cross-device discrepancies and training an adversarial discriminator. This
method significantly reduces the computation of MI
terms, providing practical solutions for theoretical objectives.
• Building on feature disentanglement, we propose a
feature importance-aware selective transmission strategy, DisenIB-TOSC-ST, which first employs mutual
information neural estimation (MINE) to quantify the
importance of disentangled features. Guided by the
insight that “common feature is transmitted once while
private features are transmitted on demand,” the strategy
dynamically discriminates and regulates redundant feature transmission, thereby reducing communication costs.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section II
introduces the system model. Section III presents the proposed
DisenIB-TOSC and system optimization method. Section IV
designs the DisenIB-TOSC-ST method. Section V presents the
experimental results. Section VI is conclusion.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL
Fig. 1 considers a multi-device cooperative TOSC system
comprising multiple edge devices and a base station with an
edge server, where edge devices are equipped with semantic
transmitters and the edge server deploys a semantic receiver
to perform cooperative task inference, the detailed process is
as follows.
Semantic Transmitter: It consists of semantic encoder and
JSCC encoder. Taking multi-view image classification as an
example, each edge device k (i.e., smart camera) in set
K = {1, 2, . . . K} collects image data xk ∈ RN of the same
observed object from different views, where N = C × H × W
is the image size, all views share the object label y ∈ {0, 1}C ,
which is a one-hot encoded vector of length C (i.e., number
of classes). Thus, the data set composed of all views is
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xK , y). Edge device k first extracts local image
features z k via semantic encoder FEϕk : RN → RM (with
ϕk as model parameters), denoted as
z k = FEϕk (xk ) , ∀k ∈ K

(1)

To facilitate identifying redundant features, each device k is
deployed with a common JSCC encoder Enccφck : RM → CL/2

and a private JSCC encoder Encpφp : RM → CL/2 , which
k
disentangles image features z k into common encoded feature
p
c
v k and private encoded feature v k (i.e., semantic symbols)
for transmission, where φck and φpk denote the corresponding
model parameters, respectively. This process is expressed as
v ck = Enccφck (z k ) , ∀k ∈ K

(2)

v pk = Encpφp (z k ) ,
k

(3)

∀k ∈ K

Wireless Channel: Before transmission, v ck and v pk undergo
power normalization to adapt to the limited transmit power
p 2
c 2
P of the semantic transmitter, i.e., (vk,i
) ≤ P, (vk,i
) ≤
P, i = 1, 2, . . . , L/2. The additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel is considered and modeled as a non-trainable
neural network layer. Assuming the channel model is known
and remains unchanged during training, the transmissions of
encoded features over Channel : CL/2 → CL/2 are defined
as
ṽ ck = v ck + nk , ∀k ∈ K
ṽ pk = v pk + nk , ∀k ∈ K

(4)
(5)

where nk denotes channel noise following zero-mean Gaussian distribution, i.e., nk ∼ N (0, σn2 I) with variance σn2 .
Semantic Receiver: The semantic receiver consists a joint
JSCC decoder and a task inference module, where the joint
JSCC decoder Decθ : CKL → RM (with θ as model parameters) concatenates all semantic symbols transmitted from edge
devices to generate fused decoded feature v̂, denoted as
v̂ = Decθ (concat [ṽ c1 , ṽ p1 , . . . , ṽ cK , ṽ pK ])

(6)

where concat [·] represents the feature concatenation operator.
Finally, the classifier Classifierϑ : RM → {0, 1}C determines the image category ŷ with parameter ϑ, denoted as
ŷ = Classifierϑ (v̂)

(7)

III. D ISEN IB G UIDED M ULTIDEVICE C OOPERATIVE
TOSC M ETHOD
From a probabilistic perspective, input image data from
all devices (x1 , x2 , . . . , xK , y) can be regarded as instantiations of the random variable (X1 , X2 , . . . , XK , Y ), and
similarly, feature vectors z k , v ck , v pk , ṽ ck , ṽ pk , v̂, ŷ generated
during forward propagation correspond to random variables

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

TABLE I
S EMANTIC C OMMUNICATION S YSTEM S TRUCTURE FOR S EVERAL TASKS

retaining minimal input data information. This aligns with the
goal of TOSC, i.e., the extracted features should maximize
the preservation of task-relevant information while enabling
maximal data compression to reduce communication costs.
Guiding the feature extraction of semantic encoder via IB
theory is thus reasonable, with the IB objective [40] for edge
device k formulated as
LIB ,k = −I (Y ; Zk ) +β I (Xk ; Zk ), ∀k ∈ K
| {z }
| {z }
Distortion

Fig. 2. The theoretical workflow of multi-device cooperative DisenIB-TOSC.

Zk , Vkc , Vkp , Ṽkc , Ṽkp , V̂ , Ŷ , respectively. In this process, the
random variables form the following Markov chains:
Y → Xk → Zk → Vkc → Ṽkc ,
Y → Xk → Zk → Vkp → Ṽkp ,

∀k ∈ K

(8)

∀k ∈ K

(9)

{Ṽ1c , Ṽ1p , Ṽ2c , Ṽ2p , . . . , ṼKc , ṼKp } → V̂ → Ŷ

(10)

and
One of the instantiated probabilistic transfer satisfies:

(12)

Rate

where the distortion term I (Y ; Zk ) = H (Y ) − H (Y |Zk )
denotes the MI between Y and Zk that determines task
performance, and the rate term I (Xk ; Zk ) denotes the MI
between Xk and Zk that determines the compression
degree.
R
β is weight factor. Notably, H (Y ) = − p(y) log(y)dy
denotes the entropy of all category labels in the dataset, which
is a constant and can be omitted in the optimization problem.
Thus, LIB ,k can be simplified and expanded as
LIB ,k := H (Y |Zk ) + βI (Zk ; X)
Z Z
=−
p (y|z k ) p (z k ) log p (y|z k ) dydz k
Z Z
p (z k |xk )
+β
p (z k |xk ) p (xk ) log
dxk dz k
p (z k )

= Ep(xk ,y) Ep(zk |xk ) (− log p (y|z k )) +
βDKL [p (z k |xk ) ||p (z k )]}
(13)

A. IB Guided Local Feature Extraction

Observing the above equation, we only need to solve the
conditional probability distributions p (y|z k ) and p (z k |xk ),
as well as the marginal probability distribution p (z k ). Given
the Markov chain Y → Xk → Zk , p (z k ) and p (y|z k ) are
calculated as
Z
p (z k ) = p (xk , z k )dxk
Z
= p (xk ) p (z k |xk )dxk
(14)
R
p (y, xk , z k )dxk
p (y, z k )
=
p (y|z k ) =
p (z k )
p (z k )
R
p (y|xk ) p (xk ) p (z k |xk )dxk
=
p (z k )
R
p (xk , y) p (z k |xk )dxk
=
(15)
p (z k )

As a classic concept in representation learning, IB theory
aims to obtain features that are sufficient for inference while

As shown in the above equations, both p (y|z k ) and p (z k )
depend on p (z k |xk ). Here, p (z k |xk ) denotes the feature

p (ŷ|xk ) = pϑ (ŷ|v̂) pθ (v̂|ṽ k ) pchannel (ṽ k |v k )
pφk (v k |z k ) pϕk (z k |xk ) , ∀k ∈ K

(11)

To optimize the aforementioned model parameters, this
section develops the proposed DisenIB-TOSC in detail. First, it
introduces IB guided local feature extraction to train respective
semantic encoders. Second, it formulates novel DisenIB objective to guide global optimization, including training JSCC
encoders and the joint decoder, thereby enhancing multi-device
cooperative task performance and achieving feature disentanglement. Additionally, both the IB and DisenIB objectives are
derived into computationally tractable forms. Finally, a multistage training algorithm is designed to optimize the system.
The theoretical workflow is shown in Fig. 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: DISENTANGLED INFORMATION BOTTLENECK GUIDED MULTIDEVICE COOPERATIVE TOSC

extraction process, making direct computation of the integrals
in Eqs. (1) and (15) intractable. To this end, we introduce
variational distributions q (y|z k ) and q (z k ) to approximate
p (y|z k ) and p (z k ), respectively, yielding a tractable IB
objective, with the derivation and resulting variational upper
bound provided in Eqs. (39)-(41) of Appendix A.
To optimize Eq. (41), we first employ DNNs to parameterize the KL divergence DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )] of Eq. (41)
following [30] and [40]. Specifically, p (z k |xk ) is modeled
as a multivariate Gaussian distribution N (µk , Σk ), where the
mean vector µk = (µk,1 , µk,2 , . . . , µk,M ) ∈ RM and diagonal
2
2
2
covariance matrix Σk = diag(σk,1
, σk,2
, . . . , σk,M
) ∈ RM ×M
M
with σ k = (σk,1 , σk,2 , . . . , σk,M ) ∈ R can be parameterized by fully-connected layers µk (xk ; ϕk ) and σ k (xk ; ϕk ),
respectively. The variational distribution q (z k ) is assumed to
follow the multivariate standard normal distribution N (0, I).
Thus, DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )] can be simplified as
!
M
2
X
µ2k,m + σk,m
−1
− log σk,m
(16)
DKL =
2
m=1
The derivation of the above equation is shown in Appendix B.
Accordingly, the latent feature representation z k is obtained
by adopting reparameterization trick, formulated as
z k = µk + σ k

εk

(17)

where εk ∼ N (0, I),
denotes the element-wise product.
Otherwise, the negative log-likelihood term − log q (y|z k )
directly governs inference accuracy, it is proportional to the
cross-entropy loss between prediction ŷ and ground truth y.
Given a batch B of data samples, an unbiased estimate of the
gradient can be obtained via Monte Carlo sampling, yielding
the estimated value of the variational upper bound of the IB
objective. This enables gradient-based optimization of local
semantic encoder k via backpropagation.

6263

Definition 2: Private feature View-specific information such
as view-varying geometric features (e.g., aspect ratio, angle,
relative object position), and occlusion details in specific
views. Notably, private features often carry critical information
that can enhance image understanding.
Inspired by the DIB [33] and the single-device DisenIB
objective [45], we reformulate the DisenIB objective for
multi-device cooperative TOSC, maximizing cooperative task
performance while achieving feature disentanglement. Our
formulated objective LDisenIB is defined as
LDisenIB = −I(Y ; V̂ ) − α

K
X

I(Y ; Ṽk )

k=1

{z

|

}

T ask

+γ

K
X

I (Vkc ; Vkp ) − λI (V1c ; V2c ; . . . ; VKc )

k=1

{z

|

Disentanglement

}
(18)

where, LDisenIB comprises two sub-objectives, i.e., the task
performance constraint LT ask adopting the DIB and the feature disentanglement constraint LDisen . For LT ask , I(Y ; V̂ )
quantifies MI between fused decoded features and inference
results, and I(Y ; Ṽk ) measures each device’s contribution
to task inference. For LDisen , I (V1c ; V2c ; . . . ; VKc ) identifies
common encoded features across devices, and I (Vkc ; Vkp )
encourages the separation of common and private features on
each device. α, γ, λ denote the weight factors. Next, we solve
and optimize two sub-objectives, respectively.
Solving
 for LT ask : Similar

to Eq. (1), both
 MI terms
I Y ; V̂ = H (Y ) − H Y |V̂ and I Y ; Ṽk = H (Y ) −


H Y |Ṽk contain the constant H (Y ), which can be omitted
in optimization problem. Thus, LT ask can be simplified as
K




X
LT ask := H Y |V̂ + α
H Y |Ṽk

B. DisenIB Guided Global JSCC
Multi-view images captured by edge devices provide
comprehensive information but introduce redundancy that
inefficiently consumes communication resources. Fortunately,
related studies on multi-view learning and cross-domain clustering have widely adopted feature decomposition, leading to
a consensus that “common features are shared across views
(or domains) while private features are unique to individual
views (or domains)”. This consensus provides a reasonable
basis for identifying overlapping (or redundant) features [42],
[43], [44]. Accordingly, following image feature extraction,
we can further disentangle these features into common (viewinvariant) and private (view-specific) components to identify
task-relevant factors. Next, we first define common and private
feature, then formulate and derive the DisenIB objective for
global JSCC optimization.
Definition 1: Common feature Shared information across
multiple views such as object labels, overlapping geometric
structures, and consistent visual attributes (e.g., shape, color).
Importantly, common features are not inherently crucial, for
instance, background elements may introduce noise.

k=1

Z Z
=−
−α

p (y|v̂) p (v̂) log p (y|v̂) dydv̂
K Z Z
X

p (y|ṽ k ) p (ṽ k ) log p (y|ṽ k ) dydṽ k

k=1

(19)
Due to the computational intractability of p (y|v̂) and
p (y|ṽ k ), we also use variational approximation to solve
LT ask . Through variational distributions q (y|v̂) and q (y|ṽ k )
approximating the true distributions, the derivation and resulting variational upper bound are provided in Eqs. (44) and (45)
of Appendix C, respectively.
The negative log-likelihood terms − log q (y|v̂) and
− log q (y|ṽ k ) in Eq. (45) determine the task performance
of multi-device cooperative inference and single-device independent inference, respectively, which are proportional to the
cross-entropy loss between predictions and truths. Given a
batch B of data samples, an unbiased estimation of the
gradient is obtained via Monte Carlo sampling, yielding the
estimated value of Ltask .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Solving for LDisen : We first identify common encoded
features across devices by maximizing I(V1c ; V2c ; . . . ; VKc ).
Notably, this term corresponds to multivariate MI (MMI)
involving multiple variables v c1 , v c2 , . . . , v cK . Based on the definition of MMI derived from the inclusion-exclusion principle,
it can be denoted as [48]
X
|S|+1
I (V1c ; V2c ; . . . ; VKc ) =
(−1)
H (VSc )
S⊆K,S6=∅


Z Z
X
|S|+1
c
c
=
(−1)
−
p (v S ) dv S
(20)
S⊆K,S6=∅

where S and |S| denote any non-empty subset of the device
set K and its size, respectively. H (VSc ) denotes the joint
entropy of the common encoded features v ck for all device
k ∈ S, p (v cS ) represents the corresponding joint proba|S|+1
bility distribution within subset S. The term (−1)
is
an alternating sign factor inherent to the inclusion-exclusion
principle, which determines the positive/negative contribution
of each subset’s joint entropy to the MMI. We take K = 3
as an example, K has a total of 7 non-empty subsets, i.e.,
S ∈ {1}, {2}, {3}, {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {2, 3}, {1,R 2,
R 3}. cFor Sc =
c
c
c
)
=
H
(V
,
V
)
=
p (v S ) dv S =
{1,R2},
we
have
H
(V
1
2
S
R
−
p (v c1 , v c2 ) dv c1 dv c2 .
As demonstrated, there will be 2K −1 non-empty subset for
K variables. For practical scenarios with K > 3, direct calculation of MMI becomes computationally intractable due to the
exponential growth of joint entropy terms and the need to estimate high-dimensional joint distributions. For computational
feasibility, we reexamine the meaning of I (V1c ; V2c ; . . . ; VKc ),
it quantifies the interdependence among multiple variables.
Optimizing the MI term aims to ensure the “consistency”
of all common encoded features v c1 , v c2 , . . . , v cK , which can
be measured by the “distance”. Consequently, both the KL
divergence and the original MI term can be maximized when
all common encoded features are highly similar. Thus, we
introduce a consistency constraint LConsis to optimize the
common JSCC encoder [47], converting the maximization
of I (V1c ; V2c ; . . . ; VKc ) to the minimization of the distance
among v c1 , v c2 , . . . , v cK , promoting their feature alignment in
the shared subspace, LConsis is defined as

Next, we minimize I(Vkc ; Vkp ), ∀k ∈ K to separate private
encoded feature. I(Vkc ; Vkp ) is expanded as
Z Z
p (v ck , v pk )
dv c dv p
I (Vkc ; Vkp ) =
p (v ck , v pk ) log
p (v ck ) p (v pk ) k k


p (v ck , v pk )
(23)
= Ep(vc ,vp ) log
k
k
p (v ck ) p (v pk )
The above equation denotes that I(Vkc ; Vkp ) equals the
expected value of the logarithm of the density ratio, i.e.,
the ratio of the joint probability distribution p (v ck , v pk ) to
the product of marginal distributions p (v ck ) p (v pk ), and this
is also computationally intractable. Re-evaluating this equation, minimizing I(Vkc ; Vkp ) aims to bring this density ratio
p (v ck , v pk ) /p (v ck ) p (v pk ) close to 1, in other words, ensuring
v ck and v pk are approximately mutually independent, thereby
achieving feature disentanglement.
Consequently, we adopt the density ratio trick [49] to
optimize I (Vkc ; Vkp ), which involves a discriminator Discrχk :
CL/2 → [0, 1] composed of a neural network to estimate the
density ratio p (v ck , v pk ) /p (v ck ) p (v pk ), χk denotes the model
parameters of the k-th discriminator. To train the discriminator, we sample positive samples (v ck , v pk ) from p(v ck , v pk )
c
p
and construct negative samples (v 0 k , v 0 k ) to approximate
p
c
p(v k )p(v k ). Specifically, positive samples are obtained by
first randomly sampling image feature z k and then drawing
from p(v ck , v pk |z k ) = p(v ck |z k )p(v pk |z k ) based on the Markov
chain Vkc ↔ Zk ↔ Vkp , preserving the inherent correlation
between v ck and v pk . Negative samples are constructed by first
c
p
independently sampling v 0 k from p(v ck ) and v 0 k from p(v pk ),
then randomly shuffling their pairing along the batch axis.
p
c
Since the correlation between negative samples v 0 k and v 0 k
is disrupted, they approximate the independent distribution
p(v ck )p(v pk ). Given the generated sample pairs, Discrχk is
adversarially trained to distinguish them, where the output of
1 indicates that the sample is from p(v ck , v pk ), while an output
of 0 indicates that the sample is from p(v ck )p(v pk ). The loss
function of the discriminator is given by
LDiscr = Ep(vc ,vp ) {− log (1 − Discrχk (v ck , v pk ))}
k
k

c
p
+ Ep(vc )p(vp ) − log Discrχk v 0 k , v 0 k
k
k
(24)

K

1 X c
LConsis =
||v k − v cmean ||22
K

(21)

k=1


c

where, v cmean =
v k /K aims to gather the central feature
among v c1 , v c2 , . . . , v cK , ||·||22 is the squared L2 norm. However,
direct optimization v ck is challenging due to the island effect of
devices, since these devices are uniformly coordinated by edge
server with no direct communication among them. Fortunately,
v ck is wirelessly forwarded to generate ṽ ck , which can be
uniformly optimized by the edge server. Thus, the optimization
of Eq. (1) can be approximated as
P

K

LConsis =

1 X c
||ṽ k − ṽ cmean ||22
K
k=1

where, ṽ cmean =

P


ṽ ck /K.

(22)

When achieving Nash equilibrium, the minimized I (Vkc ; Vkp )
can be estimated by the output of Discrχk , denoted as


Discrχk (v ck , v pk )
I (Vkc ; Vkp ) ≈ Ep(vck ,vpk ) log
1 − Discrχk (v ck , v pk )

(25)

C. Multi-Stage Model Training Algorithm
A multi-stage model training algorithm is designed to optimize the system. In the first stage, local semantic encoders of
edge devices are trained independently using LIB ,k , ∀k ∈ K,
where multiple classifiers Classifierϑk : RM → {0, 1}C
are independently deployed on the edge server to perform
task inference ŷ k . Building on the extracted image features,
the second stage optimizes cooperative task inference and
the common JSCC encoders, with LT ask and LConsis in
LDisenIB serving as the optimization objectives, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: DISENTANGLED INFORMATION BOTTLENECK GUIDED MULTIDEVICE COOPERATIVE TOSC

Algorithm 1 The Multi-Stage Model Training Algorithm

6265

each device, i.e., semantic importance, the edge server calculates I(Vkc ; V̂ ) and I(Vkp ; V̂ ) using the mutual information
neural estimator (MINE) [50], respectively. Generally, semantic importance evaluation can also be achieved through other
methods, such as attention mechanisms [38] and likelihood
estimation [39].
MINE is based on neural network Tδ that approximates
the MI lower bound by optimizing parameters δ and then
maximizes this bound. Although computing MI of feature
vectors is computationally expensive, our semantic importance evaluation is performed only once during the inference
phase, making the computational overhead manageable. Taking I(Vkc ; V̂ ) as an example, its lower bound is expressed as

I(Vkc ; V̂ ) ≥ sup Ep(vc ,v̂) Tck,δ (v ck , v̂)
k
c
Tk,δ

n c c o
− log Ep(vc )p(v̂) eTk,δ (vk ,v̂)

(26)

k

To maximize this lower bound, MINE Tck,δ , ∀k ∈ K is
trained by unsupervised way, its loss function is defined as

Lck,M IN E = −Ep(vc ,v̂) Tck,δ (v ck , v̂)
k
n c c o
+ log Ep(vc )p(v̂) eTk,δ (vk ,v̂)
(27)
k

where the expectation terms in the above equation involve
both the joint probability distribution and the product of
marginal distributions. These terms can be approximated by
sampling from p (v ck , v̂) and p (v ck ) p (v̂). As the sample
batches increases, the expectation terms converge to their truth.
Similarly, I(Vkp ; V̂ ) is estimated by training MINE Tpk,δ .
Therefore, the semantic importance ςkc , ςkp , ∀k ∈ K of v ck
and v pk can be respectively expressed as
I(Vkc ; V̂ )


I(Vkc ; V̂ ) + I(Vkp ; V̂ )

(28)

I(Vkp ; V̂ )


K
c ; V̂ ) + I(V p ; V̂ )
I(V
k=1
k
k

(29)

ςkc = P

K
k=1

In the third stage, to separate private encoded feature v pk , the
trained common JSCC encoders are frozen, and then LT ask
and LDiscr are used to perform model fine-tuning, thereby
achieving task optimization and effective feature disentanglement. The specific process is shown in Algorithm 1.
IV. F EATURE I MPORTANCE -AWARE S ELECTIVE
T RANSMISSION S TRATEGY
Building on the feature disentanglement, this section first
quantifies the importance of common and private encoded
features, then designs a selective transmission strategy,
DisenIB-TOSC-ST, to preserve task performance while reducing communication costs.

ςkp = P

p
c
, ς1p , ς2p , . . . , ςK
} is further
Next, the set ς = {ς1c , ς2c , . . . , ςK
normalized to restrict them to the range [0,1], thereby avoiding
extreme values. The normalized ς˜kc , ς˜kp can be expressed as

ςkc − ςmin
ςmax − ςmin
ς p − ςmin
p
ς˜k = k
ςmax − ςmin
ς˜kc =

(30)
(31)

where, ςmax , ςmin denote the maximum and minimum values
in set ς, respectively.
B. Selective Feature Transmission Strategy

A. MI-Based Feature Importance Awareness
In the optimized multi-device cooperative TOSC system,
both common encoded features v ck and private encoded feature
v pk contain task-relevant information to varying degrees. To
measure the contribution of common and private features from

The edge server dynamically controls device activation and
feature transmission based on the obtained importance values.
Since the common encoded features v ck represent the shared
information across devices, transmitting the feature from a
single-device is sufficient. Thus, we use the hard binarization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

function to process the importance set of common encoded
c
features ς˜c = {˜
ς1c , ς˜2c , . . . , ς˜K
}, defined as
(
c
ς1c , ς˜2c , . . . , ς˜K
}
1 if ς˜kc = max{˜
ς˜kc =
(32)
0 else
The common encoded features selected for transmission can
be represented as v ck = ς˜kc · v ck .
For the importance set of private encoded features ς˜p =
p
p
}, a threshold ςthreshold
is set to control the
{˜
ς1p , ς˜2p , . . . , ς˜K
transmission of private encoded features, defined as
(
p
ς˜p if ς˜kp ≥ ςthreshold
p
ς˜k = k
(33)
0 else
Thus, the private encoded features selected for transmission
can be represented as v pk = ς˜kp · v pk .
Algorithm 2 Feature Importance-Aware Selective Transmission Algorithm

The compression ratio η is used to quantify the communication cost saved by DisenIB-TOSC-ST compared to the baseline
DisenIB-TOSC transmitting all encoded features, defined as
!
PK
PK
c
ςkp ))
1
k=1 (1 − I (˜
k=1 (1 − ς˜k )
η =1−
+
(34)
2
K
K
where, the indicator function means that if ς˜kp > 0, then
I (˜
ςkp ) = 1, otherwise, I (˜
ςkp ) = 0. With the above strategy, the
system can implement a priority-based feature transmission
mechanism considering both task-specific demand and feature
importance. For tasks requiring higher performance, a lower
threshold can be adopted at the expense of communication
costs to ensure more private encoded features are transmitted.
Conversely, for tasks preferring lower communication costs,

the threshold can be increased to prioritize the transmission of
the most critical private encoded features. Therefore, the strategy only activates some devices or transmit partial encoded
features, which also helps reduce the computational cost on
devices. The specific process is shown in Algorithm 2.
V. S IMULATION A NALYSIS
This section evaluates the proposed method on several tasks,
including multi-view image classification, object recognition,
and retrieval. First, we compare its task performance with
baselines. Second, we verify the effectiveness of the proposed
method in reducing communication costs. Third, we analyze
the impacts of the number of devices and JSCC performance,
respectively. Fourth, we present visualization and case studies.
Finally, we conduct a complexity analysis.
A. Simulation Setting
Datasets: For the multi-view image classification task, we
used the MNIST [51] and CIFAR-10 [52] datasets. The
MNIST contains 28 × 28 pixel grayscale handwritten digits
(10 classes) with 60,000 training and 10,000 test images. The
CIFAR-10 consists of 32 × 32 pixel color images with 10
classes. It includes 50,000 training images and 10,000 test
images. Following the setting in [40], we horizontally split
images to create two views, simulating cooperative inference
between two edge devices.
For the multi-view object recognition task, the ModelNet40
image dataset is employed for for validation [53]. This dataset
is a 3D model library containing 40 categories. It includes
12,311 objects as the training set and 2,468 objects as the
test set. Each 3D object is represented by 12 views generated
through 30 rotational increments, effectively simulating 12
edge devices participating in cooperative inference.
For the multi-view object retrieval task, we also use the
ModelNet40 dataset, with the same training/test splits as
object recognition. The task aims to retrieve all galleries
in the same category as the query via feature matching,
using multi-view data’s complementarity to boost retrieval
accuracy. Specifically, during the inference phase, the pretrained object recognition model obtained from the training set
is first employed to extract the multi-view semantic features
of test samples. Subsequently, the fused features for each test
sample are derived, which can be generated at the feature
fusion module prior to the output of the final recognition result.
For query-gallery partitioning, each test sample, represented
by its fused feature, serves as a query, while the remaining
test samples constitute the gallery (i.e., candidate matching
set). Thereafter, top-κ retrieval is performed by calculating the
feature similarity between queries and gallery samples using
the Euclidean distance, generating a top-κ ranking list sorted
in descending order of similarity scores (we set κ = 10). For
example, among the 2468 test samples, the object with ID
627 (labeled 0: “airplane”) is selected as the query, and the
remaining 2467 test samples (each with its respective label)
serve as the gallery. Following retrieval, a top-10 ranking list is
generated, where the samples labeled 0 are counted as correct
retrievals, and the rest as incorrect.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: DISENTANGLED INFORMATION BOTTLENECK GUIDED MULTIDEVICE COOPERATIVE TOSC

TABLE II
T HE I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS OF S YSTEM O PTIMIZATION

6267

percentage and compression ratio η. Specifically, Acc quantifies the proportion of correctly classified samples, denoted
as
X
1
I(ŷ = y|v̂) × 100%
(35)
Acc =
|Xtest |
Xtest

Baselines: All baselines share the same backbone networks
as our method, as shown in Table I.
Baseline 1 Centralized inference based on digital
communication: Edge devices transmit raw images via
JPEG2000 + LDPC to the edge server, which performs centralized inference using only the semantic encoder and task
module for multi-view optimization.
Baseline 2 Single-device DeepJSCC: Uses the basic
DeepJSCC framework (semantic encoder + JSCC) without
IB objective to simulate independent edge inference [21].
Critically, it only uses randomly selected single-view data
from one device, and is trained end-to-end to benchmark the
performance of isolated devices with partial data, rather than
single devices with full data.
Baseline 3 Multi-device cooperative DeepJSCC: Extends
the basic DeepJSCC without IB objective for multi-device
cooperation with multi-view data, optimizing the end-to-end
cooperative inference.
Baseline 4 Multi-device cooperative IB-DeepJSCC:
Enhances Baseline 3 with IB-guided feature extraction and
two-stage training, it first trains local semantic encoders and
then optimizes the cooperative performance across all devices
[40].
Baseline 5 Compression multi-view convolutional neural
network: it builds a shared network module across devices
based on the attention mechanism to obtain the importance of
multi-view data and then compress redundant data [38].
Implementation details: For system optimization on several
tasks, we set initial learning rates to 1 × 10−1 , 5 × 10−2 , 5 ×
10−5 , 5 × 10−5 , respectively, with image classification tasks
using a 50% learning rate decay every 10 epochs. Other
simulation parameters appear in Table II. All experiments
implement using Python and Pytorch framework on a Linux
system with an Intel Core i9-11900K processor (3.50 GHz)
and NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.
Otherwise, we use accuracy (Acc) to evaluate image classification and object recognition tasks, and mean Average
Precision (mAP) to evaluate object retrieval task, while
communication costs are quantified via feature activation

where |Xtest | denotes the number of test samples, I(ŷ = y|v̂)
is an indicator function that equals 1 if the prediction category
ŷ of a sample with multi-view fusion feature v̂ matches the
correct label y, and 0 otherwise.
mAP quantifies the retrieval accuracy by calculating the average AP across all categories, where AP
measures precision-recall performance for a single category.
In the test set with C categories, let R =
P
I
ŷ gallery = y|v̂ gallery denotes the total matched
Xtest
gallery samples in the same category y as the query, where
y ∈ {0, 1}C , v̂ gallery and ŷ gallery are the fused feature
and predicted category of a gallery sample, respectively. For
a category-y query undergoing top-κ retrieval, the top-κ
accuracy is calculated as
κ

P (κ) =


1X
I ŷ gallery,r = y|v̂ gallery,r
κ r=1

(36)

where v̂ gallery,r and ŷ gallery,r are the r-th gallery’s fusion
feature and prediction category, respectively. Thus, the AP for
this query is the average P (κ) at all positions where matched
samples are retrieved, given by
1 X
AP =
P (κ) (37)
κ={κ|I(ŷ gallery,κ =y|v̂ gallery,κ )=1}
R
mAP for all test samples (each as a query) is defined as
1 1 XX
AP × 100%
(38)
mAP =
|Xtest | C
Xtest C

B. Performance Comparison
Table III presents the performance comparison, leading to the following conclusions. (1) All methods exhibit
SNR-dependent performance improvements. (2) Our method
outperforms other baselines with the following detailed analysis. 1) Compared to Baseline 2, the several multi-device
cooperation methods (Baselines 3 ∼ 5 and ours) show significant performance gains. For example, on the MNIST image
classification, we achieve 4.9% ∼ 16.5% higher accuracy
than Baseline 2 at 5 ∼ 30 dB. This performance gain stems
from the core advantages of multi-device cooperation that
address the inherent limitations of single-device inference, i.e.,
multi-device cooperation has multi-view data complementarity, whereas Baseline 2 only uses single-view data from one
device and performs independent inference. Note Baseline 3
underperforms Baseline 2 at low SNR (<5 dB), as multidevice cooperation amplifies channel noise. 2) Compared to
Baseline 3, both Baseline 4 and our method show superior performances, e.g., the MNIST classification accuracy
improves by 0.6% ∼ 3.7% (Baseline 4) and 0.7% ∼ 4.4%
(ours) at 10 ∼ 30 dB, with more pronounced gains at
0 ∼ 5 dB. This is attributed to the IB objective’s ability

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

TABLE III
T HE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF A LL M ETHODS ON S EVERAL TASKS

TABLE IV
T HE AVERAGE I NFERENCE T IME VARYING W ITH THE N UMBER OF
D EVICES (U NIT: MS /S AMPLE )

to preserve task-relevant features, particularly enhancing lowSNR robustness. 3) Importantly, our method surpasses the
IB-based Baseline 4 and attention-based Baseline 5 (especially
at 0 dB). This improvement is attributed to the effective
utilization of common/private multi-view features via DisenIB,
which enhances feature discriminability and model robustness.
4) Baseline 1 shows strong MNIST classification accuracy
at low SNR but worse performance on other tasks, revealing
LDPC’s limitations in noise suppression.

Fig. 3. Trade off between task performance and communication cost.

C. Communication Cost
Fig. 3 illustrates the task performance-communication
cost trade-off of DisenIB-TOSC-ST across tasks at 30 dB.
p
Increasing the private feature importance threshold ςthreshold
progressively improves the compression ratio η, while task

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: DISENTANGLED INFORMATION BOTTLENECK GUIDED MULTIDEVICE COOPERATIVE TOSC

6269

Fig. 5. The impact of the number of devices on task performance.

Fig. 4. Display of feature activation percentage.

performance exhibits task-specific trends. For MNIST and
CIFAR-10 image classification tasks, task performance is
barely affected by threshold changes. The compression ratio
p
stabilizes at 0.25 initially, then inflects at ςthreshold
= 0.8
p
(MNIST) and ςthreshold = 0.7 (CIFAR-10), rising to 0.5
p
at ςthreshold
= 1.0. The reason is that both tasks involve
two devices participating in inference, with a horizontally
segmented dual-view simulation setup. Regardless of the
threshold, the 0.25 ∼ 0.5 compression ratio ensures adequate
feature transmission for stable performance. Pre-inflection, the
stable η = 0.25 means only one device’s common encoded
feature is restricted, while other features are transmitted,
indicating the importance of private encoded features in both
tasks exceed the inflection threshold. This also reflects that
most task-critical features are disentangled as private encoded
features. Thus, a high threshold (e.g., 1.0) saves communication costs without significant performance loss.
For ModelNet40 object recognition and retrieval tasks,
when the threshold ranges from [0.1, 1.0], the compression
ratio reaches 0.5 ∼ 0.92, while task performance gradually

Fig. 6. The impact of channel coding length on task performance.

declines. The reason is that both tasks involve 12 cooperative devices. With only one device transmitting common
encoded features (restricting others), a relatively high compression ratio is achieved initially. Further restricting private
feature transmission via thresholds boosts the compression
ratio but causes insufficient feature fusion, degrading task performance. Otherwise, task performance can remain 40% even
p
at ςthreshold
= 1.0, which shows that high-importance private
encoded features dominate inference, other low-importance
private encoded features and common encoded features still
aid performance improvement, validating the significance of
multi-device cooperative inference. Thus, threshold selection
for both tasks depends on specific requirements, e.g., adopting
a lower threshold for high task performance or a higher
threshold for low communication costs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

Fig. 7. t-SNE visualization of disentanglement feature on MNIST image classification task.

Fig. 8. t-SNE visualization of disentanglement feature on ModelNet40 object recognition task.

longer than those of the two baselines but remains within
an acceptable range. With the advancement of edge devices’
computing power, the practical deployment of the proposed
method is highly feasible.
E. JSCC Performance Evaluation

Fig. 4 further refines the feature activation percentages
across devices for all tasks at 30 dB building on the results
in Fig. 3. Specifically, for the DisenIB-TOSC method without
selective feature transmission, the activation percentages of
both common and private features always remain at 100%.
In contrast, DisenIB-TOSC-ST dynamically activates common
and private encoded features at varying percentages on each
device, demonstrating its adaptive compression capability.

Fig. 6 illustrates that task performance improves as channel
coding length increases and then gradually converges to the
ideal bound, which provides critical insights into the communication reliability of the JSCC codec. This is because longer
channel coding lengths increase the redundancy of transmitted symbols, enhancing the more comprehensive information.
codec’s error correction capability and ultimately improving
task performance. Furthermore, the impact of channel coding
length on task performance is significantly less pronounced
for MNIST image classification than for CIFAR-10. This
is attributed to MNIST’s simpler semantic features, which
exhibit greater tolerance to channel distortion, enabling even
shorter channel coding lengths to maintain relatively strong
performance.

D. The Effect of the Number of Devices

F. Visualization and Case Study

Fig. 5 demonstrates that task performance improves for
object recognition and retrieval tasks as the number of devices
increases. This confirms that integrating additional devices
supplies more comprehensive information. Table IV further
shows that average inference time increases linearly, which
effectively reflects the computational complexity of models.
Notably, the running time of the retrieval task comprises the
time required for feature extraction and retrieval matching,
where feature extraction time is comparable to that of the
recognition task, while the retrieval matching time can be further reduced via efficient retrieval algorithms. Consequently,
all methods improve task reliability by integrating more
devices, at the cost of increased model training complexity.
Furthermore, the proposed method outperforms Baselines 3
and 4 in task performance, while its runtime is slightly

Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 visualize task inference and feature
disentanglement using 2D t-SNE for MNIST image classification and ModelNet40 object recognition, respectively,
where the t-SNE method maps high-dimensional features
to 2D space while preserving local structure and revealing
feature clustering via t-distribution-based similarity modeling.
As shown in subfigures (a)-(d), both the encoded common
and private features exhibit symmetric distribution patterns.
Notably, common encoded features show minimal impact
on task inference, whereas private encoded features form
distinct clusters, demonstrating their strong contribution. This
indicates that the disentanglement process effectively isolates
task-relevant information in private features while relegating
non-essential information (e.g., background noise) to common
features. For MNIST image classification, this arises because

Fig. 9. Comparison of saliency maps between disentangled features and
original images on the CIFAR-10 image classification.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: DISENTANGLED INFORMATION BOTTLENECK GUIDED MULTIDEVICE COOPERATIVE TOSC

6271

Fig. 10. A case study on the ModelNet40 object retrieval task.

horizontal image splitting leaves no obvious common features,
thereby forcing semantic information into private features
under the constraints of consistency and task loss. For the
ModelNet40 object recognition, excessive object views may
limit common features to marginal content, making them ineffective for recognition. Crucially, subfigure (e) shows optimal
clustering, indicating that while common features alone lack
discriminative capacity, their fusion with private features still
enriches feature representation.
To further observe identified common/private features with
their corresponding image regions, we compare original
images with its saliency maps. Saliency map is also a
visualization tool highlighting image regions most critical
to task inference. We use the widely adopted, interpretable
Grad-CAM to obtain saliency maps via gradient importance
[54]. The result of CIFAR-10 image classification is shown
in Fig. 6, which aligns with the feature disentanglement
from Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. Due to the horizontal splitting of
image, there is no obvious common feature between device
1 and 2, and most features are identified as private features.
Consequently, common features yield indistinct saliency
maps, while private feature produces obvious saliency
maps, highlighting the object contours and confirming their
discriminative role in task inference.
Fig. 10 presents a case study on the ModelNet40 object
retrieval task. Given a query image, the corresponding
top-10 ranking list is generated by sorting gallery samples
in descending order of similarity scores. In the experiment,
the similarity score is defined as the negative of the Euclidean
distance. For clarity, only one view of each retrieved object
is displayed, with green and red markers denoting correct

TABLE V
T HE C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD

and incorrect retrievals, respectively. For example, given the
1120th query image (label 0: “airplane”), when all galleries
are transmitted at SNR = 30 dB, all top-10 results are label
0 (i.e., correct retrievals). In contrast, at SNR = 0 dB, only
the 1st to 3rd results are correct, and the remaining results are
incorrect. The reason is that channel noise degrades feature
representations, leading to spurious high similarity scores with
the query and consequent false retrievals. These results show
high retrieval accuracy under favorable channel conditions,
while excessive noise impairs feature representations and
reduces retrieval accuracy at low SNR.
G. Complexity Analysis
Table V presents the computational complexity of the proposed DisenIB-TOSC by average inference time and parameter
count. Combining with Table IV, the proposed method exhibits
slightly higher computational complexity than other baselines,
this is attributed to sacrificing computational overhead in
exchange for performance gains. In our proposed method,
the runtimes of both image classification tasks reach the
microsecond level, while those of object recognition and
retrieval attain the millisecond level, ensuring low latency.
The parameter count is also reasonable because we present

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

total counts across all devices, which scales proportionally
with the number of devices. Notably, the parameter counts of
object recognition and retrieval stem mainly from the semantic
encoders for feature extraction. In practical deployment, it can
be further reduced by replacing with lightweight models or
adopting selective transmission to restrict superfluous devices,
achieving excellent flexibility and scalability.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed DisenIB-TOSC for multi-device
cooperative inference, which can enhance task performance
while reducing communication costs with better interpretability and more fine-grained processing capacity. Specifically, we
formulated IB and DisenIB objectives to guide local semantic
encoding and global JSCC optimization, achieving simultaneous feature compression and disentanglement. We then derived
differentiable, tractable forms for both objectives. To reduce
the communication costs, we further proposed DisenIB-TOSCST, which estimated the importance of common and private
encoded features to control feature transmission. Experimental
results on several multi-view tasks demonstrated that DisenIBTOSC outperforms baselines in task performance. Meanwhile,

DisenIB-TOSC-ST achieves a favorable tradeoff between task
performance and communication costs. Additionally, visualization and case study confirmed that our method achieves
feature disentanglement in multi-device cooperative scenarios,
facilitating interpretable analysis of feature contributions to
inference performance and information characteristics.
Nevertheless, integrating additional devices for cooperative
inference still poses specific challenges. Excessive information
redundancy not only consumes unnecessary communication
resources but also increases synchronization signaling overhead and exacerbates the risk of channel conflicts during
multi-device access. An important open research direction
focuses on how to select cooperative devices based on service
requirements and network conditions to enhance communication reliability, e.g., developing efficient priority transmission
or device access control mechanisms.
A PPENDIX
A. Derivation of the Variational Upper Bound for LIB ,k
By introducing the variational distributions q (y|z k ) and
q (z k ), Eq. (1) can be rewritten as Eq. (39), shown at the
bottom of the page. Since DKL [p(y|z k ) k q (y|z k )] ≥ 0, the

LIB,k := H (Y |Zk ) + βI (Zk ; X)
Z Z
Z Z
p (z k |xk )
dxk dz k
=−
p (y|z k ) p (z k ) log p (y|z k ) dydz k +β
p (z k |xk ) p (xk ) log
p (z k )




Z Z
Z Z
p (y|z k )
p (z k |xk ) q (z k )
=−
p (y|z k ) p (z k ) log
q (y|z k ) dydz k +β
p (z k |xk ) p (xk ) log
dxk dz k
q (y|z k )
q (z ) p (z k )
 k
Z Z
Z Z
p (y|z k )
dydz k +
p (y|z k ) p (z k ) log q (y|z k ) dydz k +
=−
p (y|z k ) p (z k ) log
q (y|z k )
Z Z

Z Z
p (z k |xk )
q (z k )
β
p (z k |xk ) p (xk ) log
dxk dz k +
p (z k |xk ) p (xk ) log
dxk dz k
q (z k )
p (z k )
Z Z
Z
=−
p (y|z k ) p (z k ) log q (y|z k ) dydz k + β p (xk )DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )]dxk
Z Z
Z Z
p (z k )
p (y|z k )
dydz k −β
p (z k |xk ) p (xk ) log
dxk dz k
(39)
−
p (y|z k ) p (z k ) log
q (y|z k )
q (z k )
{z
}
{z
}
| R
|
p(z k )DKL [p(y|z k )||q(y|z k )]dz k ≥0

DKL [p(z k )||q(z k )]≥0

Z Z

Z
p (y|z k ) p (z k ) log q (y|z k ) dydz k + β p (xk )DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )]dxk
Z Z R
Z
p (xk , y) p (z k |xk )dxk
p (z k ) log q (y|z k ) dydz k + β p (xk )DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )]dxk
=−
p (z k )
Z Z Z
Z
=−
p (xk , y) p (z k |xk ) log q (y|z k ) dxk dydz k + β p (xk )DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )]dxk

= Ep(xk ,y) Ep(zk |xk ) (− log q (y|z k )) + Ep(xk ) {βDKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )]}

LIB,k ≤ −


LIB,k ≤ Ep(xk ,y) Ep(zk |xk ) (− log q (y|z k )) + βDKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )]
1
DKL [N (µ1 , Σ1 ) ||N (µ2 , Σ2 )] =
2


tr

Σ−1
2 Σ1



T

+ (µ2 − µ1 )

det (Σ1 )
Σ−1
−M
2 (µ2 − µ1 ) − log
det (Σ2 )

(40)

(41)


Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(42)

SUN et al.: DISENTANGLED INFORMATION BOTTLENECK GUIDED MULTIDEVICE COOPERATIVE TOSC

6273

K




X
LT ask := H Y |V̂ + α
H Y |Ṽk
k=1

Z Z
=−

p (y|v̂) p (v̂) log p (y|v̂) dydv̂ − α

K Z Z
X

p (y|ṽ k ) p (ṽ k ) log p (y|ṽ k ) dydṽ k

k=1




K Z Z
X
p (y|ṽ k )
p (y|v̂)
q (y|v̂) dydv̂ − α
p (y|ṽ k ) p (ṽ k ) log
q (y|ṽ k ) dydṽ k
q (y|v̂)
q (y|ṽ k )
k=1
Z Z
K Z Z
X
=−
p (y|v̂) p (v̂) log q (y|v̂) dydv̂ − α
p (y|ṽ k ) p (ṽ k ) log q (y|ṽ k ) dydṽ k


Z Z

=−

p (y|v̂) p (v̂) log

k=1
K Z Z
X

Z Z
−
|

p (y|v̂)
p (y|v̂) p (v̂) log
dydv̂ −α
q (y|v̂)
k=1 |
{z
}
R

p (y|ṽ k )
p (y|ṽ k ) p (ṽ k ) log
dydṽ k
q (y|ṽ k )
{z
}
R
p(ṽ k )DKL [p(y|ṽ k )||q(y|ṽ k )]dṽ k ≥0

p(v̂)DKL [p(y|v̂)||q(y|v̂)]dv̂≥0

Z Z
LT ask ≤ −

(44)

p (y|v̂) p (v̂) log q (y|v̂) dydv̂ − α

K Z Z
X

p (y|ṽ k ) p (ṽ k ) log q (y|ṽ k ) dydṽ k

k=1

(
= Ep(z1 ,z2 ,...,zK ,y)

− log q (y|v̂) + α

K
X

)
− log q (y|ṽ k )

(45)

k=1

R
integral term p (z k )DKL [p(y|z k ) k q (y|z k )]dzk ≥ 0 with
p (z k ) ≥ 0, and DKL [p (z k ) k q (z k )] ≥ 0, the variational
upper bound of LIB,k is given by Eq. (40), shown at the
bottom of the previous page.
In Eq. (40), the transformation of the first term is derived
from Eq. (15). For the second term of Eq. (40), since it
is independent of constant y during the optimization, there
is equivalence between the expectation of the marginal
probability distribution Ep(xk ) and the expectation of the joint
probability distribution Ep(xk ,y) . Thus, Eq. (40) can be simplified as Eq. (41), shown at the bottom of the previous page.

PM
log det (Σk ) = 2 m=1 log σk,m . By substituting each term
into the above equation, Eq. (1) in the main text is derived.
C. Derivation of the Variational Upper Bound for LT ask
By introducing the variational distributions q (y|v̂) and
q (y|ṽ k ), Ltask can be rewritten as Eq. (44), shown at
the top of the page. Since DKL [p (y|v̂) k q (y|v̂)] ≥
0 and DKL
R [p (y|ṽ k ) k q (y|ṽ k )] ≥ 0, the integral
terms
p (v̂)DKL [p (y|v̂) k q (y|v̂)]dv̂ ≥ 0 and
R
p (ṽ k )DKL [p (y|v̂) k q (y|v̂)]dṽ k ≥ 0 with p (v̂) ≥ 0 and
p (ṽ k ) ≥ 0, the variational upper bound of Ltask is given by
Eq. (45), shown at the top of the page.

B. Derivation of the KL Divergence DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )]
Given the multivariate Gaussian distribution N (µ1 , Σ1 ) and
N (µ2 , Σ2 ), where µ1 , µ2 ∈ RM denote the corresponding
mean vector, and Σ1 , Σ2 ∈ RM ×M denote the corresponding
diagonal covariance matrix, respectively. Thus, the KL divergence between two distributions can be denoted as Eq. (42),
shown at the bottom of the previous page. In the equation,
T
−1
tr (·) denotes the trace of the matrix, (·) and (·) are the
matrix transpose and inverse matrix, respectively. det (·) is the
determinant of the matrix.
Following the above equation, since p (z k |xk ) ∼
N (µk , Σk ) and q (z k ) ∼ N (0, I) in our assumption,
DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )] can be simplified as
DKL [p (z k |xk ) ||q (z k )] =

1
tr (Σk ) + µk T µk − log det (Σk ) − M
(43)
2
PM
PM
2
T
where, tr (Σk ) =
µ2 , the
m=1 σk,m , µk µk =
QMm=1 2 k,m
determinant of diagonal matrix det (Σk ) = m=1 σk,m , thus,

R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

M. A. Ferrag et al., “Edge learning for 6G-enabled Internet of Things: A
comprehensive survey of vulnerabilities, datasets, and defenses,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2654–2713, 2023.
Q. Duan, J. Huang, S. Hu, R. Deng, Z. Lu, and S. Yu, “Combining
federated learning and edge computing toward ubiquitous intelligence in
6G network: Challenges, recent advances, and future directions,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2892–2950, 2023.
H. Xie, Z. Qin, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Deep learning enabled
semantic communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 69, pp. 2663–2675, 2021.
Z. Lu et al., “Semantics-empowered communications: A tutorial-cumsurvey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 41–79, 1st
Quart., 2024.
W. Yang et al., “Semantic communications for future internet: Fundamentals, applications, and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 213–250, 1st Quart., 2023.
Z. Lyu, G. Zhu, J. Xu, B. Ai, and S. Cui, “Semantic communications
for image recovery and classification via deep joint source and channel
coding,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 8388–8404,
Aug. 2024.
J. Park, Y. Oh, S. Kim, and Y.-S. Jeon, “Joint source-channel coding
for channel-adaptive digital semantic communications,” IEEE Trans.
Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 75–89, Feb. 2025.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 74, 2026

[8]

[31] S. Hu, Z. Lou, X. Yan, and Y. Ye, “A survey on information bottleneck,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 5325–5344,
Aug. 2024.
[32] M. Federici, A. Dutta, and P. Forré, “Learning robust representations
via multi-view information bottleneck,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2020, pp. 1–26.
[33] I. E. Aguerri and A. Zaidi, “Distributed variational representation
learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 1,
pp. 120–138, Jan. 2021.
[34] J. Shao, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Learning task-oriented communication
for edge inference: An information bottleneck approach,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 197–211, Jan. 2022.
[35] L. Sun, Y. Yang, M. Chen, C. Guo, W. Saad, and H. V. Poor, “Adaptive
information bottleneck guided joint source and channel coding for
image transmission,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 8,
pp. 2628–2644, Aug. 2023.
[36] S. Li, Y. Wang, S. Guo, and C. Feng, “Task-oriented communication
for graph data: A graph information bottleneck approach,” IEEE Trans.
Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1723–1737, Jun. 2025, doi:
10.1109/TCCN.2024.3465651.
[37] S. Xie, S. Ma, M. Ding, Y. Shi, M. Tang, and Y. Wu, “Robust information
bottleneck for task-oriented communication with digital modulation,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 2577–2591, Aug. 2023.
[38] Z. Liu, C. Guo, and M. Zhu, “Semantic redundancy-aware multi-view
edge inference based on rate-distortion in IoT systems,” in Proc. IEEE
Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2024, pp. 1–6.
[39] J. Choi, Z. Hakimi, P. W. Shin, J. Sampson, and V. Narayanan,
“Context-aware convolutional neural network over distributed system
in collaborative computing,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Design Autom. Conf.,
Jun. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[40] J. Shao, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Task-oriented communication for multidevice cooperative edge inference,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 73–87, Jan. 2023.
[41] J. Shao, X. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Task-oriented communication for
edge video analytics,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 5,
pp. 4141–4154, May 2024.
[42] X. Yan, Y. Mao, Y. Ye, and H. Yu, “Cross-modal clustering with deep
correlated information bottleneck method,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 13508–13522, Oct. 2024.
[43] P. Zhang, M. Fu, R. Zhao, H. Zhang, and C. Luo, “PURE: Personalitycoupled multi-task learning framework for aspect-based multimodal
sentiment analysis,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 1,
pp. 462–477, Jan. 2025.
[44] M. Yin et al., “MVAIBNet: Multiview disentangled representation learning with information bottleneck,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20,
no. 10, pp. 11511–11520, Oct. 2024.
[45] Z. Pan, L. Niu, J. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Disentangled information
bottleneck,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 9285–9293.
[46] L. Sun, Y. Yang, M. Chen, and C. Guo, “Disentangled information
bottleneck guided privacy-protective joint source and channel coding for image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 11,
pp. 6992–7005, Nov. 2024.
[47] W. Wang, D. Cai, Z. Liu, Z. Ding, and P. Fan, “Wireless image semantic
cooperative transmission in distributed edge networks: An information
disentanglement method,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Workshop Signal
Process. Adv. Wireless Commun. (SPAWC), Sep. 2024, pp. 461–465.
[48] K. R. Ball, C. Grant, W. R. Mundy, and T. J. Shafer, “A multivariate
extension of mutual information for growing neural networks,” Neural
Netw., vol. 95, pp. 29–43, Nov. 2017.
[49] L. Nguyen, M. J. Wainwright, and M. I. Jordan, “Estimating divergence functionals and the likelihood ratio by penalized convex risk
minimization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 20, 2007,
pp. 1089–1096.
[50] M. I. Belghazi et al., “MINE: Mutual information neural estimation,”
2018, arXiv:1801.04062.
[51] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11,
pp. 2278–2324, Nov. 1998.
[52] P. Chrabaszcz, I. Loshchilov, and F. Hutter, “A downsampled variant of ImageNet as an alternative to the CIFAR datasets,” 2017,
arXiv:1707.08819.
[53] Z. Wu et al., “3D ShapeNets: A deep representation for volumetric
shapes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2015, pp. 1912–1920.
[54] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626.

D. Gündüz et al., “Beyond transmitting bits: Context, semantics, and
task-oriented communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41,
no. 1, pp. 5–41, Jan. 2023.
[9] C. Zeng et al., “Task-oriented semantic communication over rate splitting
enabled wireless control systems for URLLC services,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 722–739, Feb. 2024.
[10] J. Kang et al., “Personalized saliency in task-oriented semantic communications: Image transmission and performance analysis,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 186–201, Jan. 2023.
[11] H. Wei, W. Ni, W. Xu, F. Wang, D. Niyato, and P. Zhang, “Federated
semantic learning driven by information bottleneck for task-oriented
communications,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 2652–2656,
Oct. 2023.
[12] P. Yi, Y. Cao, X. Kang, and Y.-C. Liang, “Integrated distributed semantic
communication and over-the-air computation for cooperative spectrum
sensing,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 2416–2430, Apr.
2025.
[13] J. Xu, H. Yao, R. Zhang, T. Mai, S. Huang, and S. Guo, “Federated learning powered semantic communication for UAV swarm cooperation,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 140–146, Aug. 2024.
[14] Y. Liu et al., “Semantic communication empowered collaborative perception in constrained networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 701–705, Mar. 2025.
[15] W. F. Lo, N. Mital, H. Wu, and D. Gündüz, “Collaborative semantic
communication for edge inference,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett.,
vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 1125–1129, Jul. 2023.
[16] A. H. Razlighi, M. H. V. Tillmann, E. Beck, C. Bockelmann, and
A. Dekorsy, “Cooperative and collaborative multi-task semantic communication for distributed sources,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.,
Jun. 2025, pp. 3966–3971.
[17] C. Cai, X. Yuan, and Y.-J. Angela Zhang, “Multi-device task-oriented
communication via maximal coding rate reduction,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 18096–18110, Dec. 2024.
[18] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the
physical layer,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 3, no. 4,
pp. 563–575, Dec. 2017.
[19] S. Sun, Z. Qin, H. Xie, and X. Tao, “Task-oriented scene graph-based
semantic communications with adaptive channel coding,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 17070–17083, Nov. 2024.
[20] N. Farsad, M. Rao, and A. Goldsmith, “Deep learning for joint sourcechannel coding of text,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal
Process. (ICASSP), Calgary, AB, Canada, Apr. 2018, pp. 2326–2330.
[21] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. B. Kurka, and D. Gündüz, “Deep joint sourcechannel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cognit.
Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, Sep. 2019.
[22] Z. Weng and Z. Qin, “Semantic communication systems for
speech transmission,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 8,
pp. 2434–2444, Aug. 2021.
[23] S. Wang et al., “Wireless deep video semantic transmission,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 214–229, Jan. 2023.
[24] P. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “Multi-modal encrypted
retrieval method with semantic feature fusion towards Internet of Medical Things,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., pp. 1–15, 2025, doi:
10.1109/JBHI.2025.3638367.
[25] X. Yu, T. Lv, W. Li, W. Ni, D. Niyato, and E. Hossain, “Multitask semantic communication with graph attention-based feature
correlation extraction,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 4371–4388, May 2025.
[26] S. Wei, C. Feng, C. Guo, B. Zhang, and J. Chen, “Task-oriented multiuser semantic communication based on deep over-the-air computation,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 9, pp. 14343–14357, Sep. 2025.
[27] W. Chen et al., “Semantic communication based on large language
model for underwater image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 2060–2075, Feb. 2026, doi: 10.1109/
TMC.2025.3607717.
[28] Z. Bao et al., “SDAC—Semantic digital analog converter for
semantic communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 11,
pp. 11061–11077, Nov. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2025.3566976.
[29] Z. Cao, H. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Gan, S. Jin, and G. Ye Li, “Physical-layer
secure transmission for semantic communication systems,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 73, no. 12, pp. 14397–14412, Dec. 2025, doi: 10.1109/
TCOMM.2025.3610220.
[30] A. A. Alemi, I. Fischer, J. V. Dillon, and K. Murphy, “Deep variational
information bottleneck,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR),
2016, pp. 1–19.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 02:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

