                                                                                                                                                                1



                                                      SCAN: Semantic Communication with
                                                                   Adaptive Channel Feedback
                                                          Guangyi Zhang, Qiyu Hu, Yunlong Cai, and Guanding Yu


                                                                                                 Abstract
arXiv:2306.15534v1 [eess.SP] 27 Jun 2023




                                                     In existing semantic communication systems for image transmission, some images are generally
                                                 reconstructed with considerably low quality. As a result, the reliable transmission of each image cannot
                                                 be guaranteed, bringing significant uncertainty to semantic communication systems. To address this
                                                 issue, we propose a novel performance metric to characterize the reliability of semantic communication
                                                 systems termed semantic distortion outage probability (SDOP), which is defined as the probability of
                                                 the instantaneous distortion larger than a given target threshold. Then, since the images with lower
                                                 reconstruction quality are generally less robust and need to be allocated with more communication
                                                 resources, we propose a novel framework of Semantic Communication with Adaptive chaNnel feedback
                                                 (SCAN). It can reduce SDOP by adaptively adjusting the overhead of channel feedback for images
                                                 with different reconstruction qualities, thereby enhancing transmission reliability. To realize SCAN, we
                                                 first develop a deep learning-enabled semantic communication system for multiple-input multiple-output
                                                 (MIMO) channels (DeepSC-MIMO) by leveraging the channel state information (CSI) and noise variance
                                                 in the model design. We then develop a performance evaluator to predict the reconstruction quality of
                                                 each image at the transmitter by distilling knowledge from DeepSC-MIMO. In this way, images with
                                                 lower predicted reconstruction quality will be allocated with a longer CSI codeword to guarantee the
                                                 reconstruction quality. We perform extensive experiments to demonstrate that the proposed scheme can
                                                 significantly improve the reliability of image transmission while greatly reducing the feedback overhead.


                                                                                               Index Terms

                                                     Channel feedback, semantic communication, semantic distortion outage probability (SDOP), multiple-
                                                 input multiple-output (MIMO), wireless image transmission.

                                             G. Zhang, Q. Hu, Y. Cai, and G. Yu are with the College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhe-
                                           jiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: zhangguangyi@zju.edu.cn; qiyhu@zju.edu.cn; ylcai@zju.edu.cn; yuguand-
                                           ing@zju.edu.cn).
                                                                                                   2



                                        I. I NTRODUCTION

  Driven by the extensive deployment of various intelligent services, such as the autonomous
driving and the Internet of Everything [1]–[3], a fierce demand for transmitting massive amounts
of information has sprung up. It pushes industry and academia to further improve the transmission
efficiency. To this end, semantic communication, as a new communication paradigm, has been
regarded as a promising technology in 6G communications. Semantic communication is not
the pursuit of accurate bit transmission, but the ability to transmit the desired meaning of
the message, resulting in higher transmission efficiency than traditional communication system
based on Shannon theory [3]. Therefore, the research on the semantic-aware physical layer
communication design for semantic communication is expected to be explored.


A. Prior Work

  Recently, inspired by the success of deep learning, autoencoder architectures parameterized by
deep neural networks (DNNs) have been used to implement semantic communication systems,
achieving significant performance gains [3]. In particular, the existing focuses of semantic
communication can be mainly divided into two categories: (i) Design effective semantic encoding
and decoding algorithms [4]–[13]; (ii) Investigate advanced physical layer modules for semantic
communication [14]–[19]. For the first issue, the transmitter and receiver are regarded as a pair of
encoder and decoder consisting of DNNs, which are exploited to directly encode the input data
of different modalities to channel symbols at the transmitter and decode the received channel
symbols at the receiver. The deep joint source and channel coding (JSCC) technique for wireless
image transmission has been firstly proposed in [4], where the image pixel values are mapped
to the complex-valued channel symbols through a well-designed encoder. An attention-based
semantic communication system for speech transmission has been proposed in [5]. For multi-
modal data transmission, a unified joint source-channel coding semantic communication system
for multi-modal data has been proposed in [6]. For the second issue, the researchers dedicated to
implementing semantic communication by revising or redesigning the modules in conventional
communications [14]. It is more adaptive to channel variations by considering both the semantic
information of source data and channel state information (CSI). In [15], the problems of resource
allocation and semantic information extraction for wireless semantic communication with rate
                                                                                                 3



splitting have been investigated. In [16], orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM)
has been combined with an autoencoder for wireless image transmission over multipath fading
channels, where the multipath channel and OFDM are represented by differentiable layers so that
the system can be trained in an end-to-end manner. Moreover, a semantic-driven constellation
design has been considered in [17] to improve the reconstruction quality of JSCC.
  Although aforementioned semantic works have achieved significant performance gains, most of
them only consider the single-input single-output (SISO) channels. However, when implementing
the semantic communication systems to the multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) scenarios,
there will be a number of new issues to solve. Among them, channel feedback for semantic
communication with MIMO is of great importance. Specifically, the strengths of MIMO, e.g.,
high spectral efficiency, are highly dependent on the acquisition of CSI by the base station (BS),
and require user equipment to feed the CSI back to the BS through feedback links, especially in
frequency division duplex (FDD) scenarios [20]–[22]. Nevertheless, the substantial antennas at
the BS for massive MIMO lead to a huge dimensionality of the CSI matrix, which dramatically
increases the feedback overhead. To address this issue, many techniques have been developed
to reduce the overhead of channel feedback, such as vector quantization and codebook-based
approaches [23]. Based on compressive sensing (CS), several algorithms have been developed to
compress the CSI matrix to reduce the overhead [24], [25], which outperform the quantization-
based methods by using the spatial and temporal correlation of CSI. In particular, by transforming
the CSI matrix into a sparse domain, low-dimensional compressed codewords can be obtained
for feedback. The authors in [25] employed the spatial correlation between proximate antennas
to compress the CSI matrix in the sparse spatial-frequency domain. In addition, there have
also been many deep learning-based methods [26]–[30] that use DNNs to compress the CSI
matrix, such as CsiNet [27] and CLNet [28]. These methods adopt an autoencoder structure
consisting of an encoder and a decoder, which outperform the CS-based methods with a much-
reduced computational complexity. Specifically, the authors in [28] proposed a forged complex
valued input layer to process signals and utilized spatial-attention to enhance the performance
of the network. For variable-rate feedback, a multi-rate framework has been developed in [29]
to compress the CSI matrix with different compression ratios. However, despite the satisfactory
performance, these methods may not be optimal in semantic communications since they have
                                                                                                  4


                                                                      Resource
                                                                      Tolerance
                                     Performance Curve




                         Threshold

                                           Image              Image
                                           (a)                (b)


    Fig. 1: (a) The target PSNR threshold and tolerance; (b) Illustration of the water-filling.


not considered semantics of sources in the designs.


B. Motivation and Contributions

  To the best of our knowledge, semantic communication systems for image transmission
generally achieve quite different performance on different images even in error-free transmission,
as shown in Fig. 1(a). This is mainly because the images are of different complexities and the
capabilities of the DNN models to handle different images are generally different. Moreover, we
observe that if the images are required to be reconstructed with a reconstruction quality larger
than a given threshold, the images with lower reconstruction quality are generally less tolerant to
disturbances. In this case, when the channel condition is poor, some images will be reconstructed
with rather low quality, leading to high uncertainty and lack of performance guarantee. Hence, it
is necessary to allocate proper resources, such as channel feedback bits and transmission power,
to the images with low reconstruction quality to guarantee their reconstruction qualities thereby
enhancing the reliability, as shown in Fig. 1(b). However, existing semantic communication
systems only focus on optimizing the end-to-end average distortions, such as average peak-signal-
to-noise (PSNR), and have not considered the reconstruction quality of each image as well as the
transmission reliability. Therefore, in this paper, we investigate the adaptive channel feedback
design of image semantic communication systems with MIMO to improve the transmission
reliability.
  Unlike previous works that consider the end-to-end expected distortion, we first propose a
novel metric, semantic distortion outage probability (SDOP), defined as the probability of the
                                                                                                                             5



distortion greater than a target distortion threshold. It is employed to characterize the reliability of
semantic communication for image transmission. Based on the observation that images with low
reconstruction quality are less robust when targeted to exceed the PSNR threshold1 , we develop
a novel framework of Semantic Communication with Adaptive chaNnel feedback (SCAN) for
image transmission to reduce SDOP thereby enhancing transmission reliability. To realize SCAN,
we first propose an attention mechanism-based MIMO transmission semantic communication
system (DeepSC-MIMO), which can adapt to channel and noise variations. In particular, the
CSI matrix and noise variance are adopted to generate the attention mask to adaptively allocate
higher power to more important feature vectors.
      In order to know the reconstruction quality in advance, we propose a performance evaluator
at the transmitter. It takes the image, CSI matrix, and noise variance as input and outputs the
predicted reconstruction quality. To train the evaluator, a knowledge distillation loss is proposed
by increasing the similarity of output features between the performance evaluator and DeepSC-
MIMO. Then, an instance-wise adaptive scheme can be developed to adjust the length of the CSI
codeword for each image, where the transmitter determines the compression level of the CSI
matrix based on the predicted reconstruction quality of a given image. The images with lower
predicted reconstruction quality will be allocated with a longer CSI codeword to guarantee the
reconstruction quality, while the codeword length of those with higher predicted reconstruction
quality can be reduced instead. Furthermore, a group-wise adaptive algorithm is developed
to simultaneously determine the CSI compression levels for a group of images to meet the
requirement of a group of images waiting for transmission. Our simulation results show that the
proposed SCAN can significantly improve the SDOP performance while greatly reducing the
feedback overhead. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
      •   A novel performance metric, SDOP, is proposed to characterize the reliability of an end-
          to-end semantic communication system.
      •   We propose DeepSC-MIMO, which adapts to channel and noise variations by leveraging
          the CSI and noise variance based on the attention mechanism.
      •   A performance evaluator is developed based on knowledge distillation [31], where a novel
          distillation loss is proposed to distill the knowledge contained in the semantic model.
  1
      PSNR can be viewed as the inverse of distortion, hence “targeted to exceed the PSNR threshold” actually denotes “targeted
to not exceed the distortion threshold”. In the following, we will use both statements for clarity.
                                                                                                     6



  •   Based on the predicted performance, an adaptive instance-wise channel feedback scheme is
      proposed to adjust the compression level of the CSI matrix.
  •   We further propose a group-wise adaptive algorithm, which aims to determine the CSI
      compression levels of a group of images to optimize the SDOP.


C. Organization and Notations

  The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II introduces the definition of SDOP.
The framework of the proposed SCAN is presented in Section III. In Section IV, the knowledge
distillation-based performance evaluator is described. Followed by the corresponding module
designs of SCAN, the instance-wise and group-wise adaptive designs are given in Section V.
Simulation results are presented in Section VI. Finally, Section VII concludes this paper.
  Notations: Scalars, vectors, and matrices are respectively denoted by lower case, boldface
lower case, and boldface upper case letters. For a matrix A, AT , AH , and ∥A∥2 are its transpose,
conjugate transpose, and Frobenius norm, respectively. For a vector a, ∥a∥ is its Euclidean norm.
Finally, Cm×n (Rm×n ) are the space of m × n complex (real) matrices.


                                    II. D EFINITION OF SDOP

  In this section, we propose a probabilistic model of semantic communication systems, in-
cluding the definitions of mappings and variables. Then, we give the definition of the proposed
SDOP based on the excess distortion event.


A. Problem Formulation

  A typical semantic communication system can be represented by the model shown in Fig. 2. In
particular, the semantic communication system can be viewed as an end-to-end communication
system developed to incorporate the channel coding and source coding. The encoding, decoding,
and transmission procedures are parameterized by the DNNs, and the system is optimized in
a back-propagation manner with the data-driven method. The input image is represented by a
vector, s = [s1 , s2 , ..., sN ] ∈ RN ×1 , with probability distribution pS , where N is the length of
the vector. Moreover, s is considered as a realization of the random variable S, in the alphabet
S. Denote the encoding function of the encoder as F(· ; θ) : RN ×1 → CK×1 , where θ denotes
                                                                                                         7


                                  Encoder           Channel           Decoder




                Fig. 2: Probabilistic model of a semantic communication system.


the trainable parameters. The encoder directly maps s into the complex channel symbol vector,
which is given by
                                            z = F (s; θ) ∈ CK×1 ,                                     (1)

where K is the number of transmitted symbols and z = [z1 , z2 , ..., zK ] ∈ CK×1 can be viewed as
a realization of the random variable Z, in alphabet Z. We define the bandwidth ratios as ρ = K
                                                                                             N
                                                                                               .
Subsequently, the encoded channel symbol vector z, is transmitted through the channel with
transition probability, pẐ|Z . Then, we obtain the received symbol vector, ẑ = [ẑ1 , ẑ2 , ..., ẑK ] ∈
CK×1 , which will be further processed by the decoder. Similarly, ẑ can be viewed as the
realization of random variable Ẑ, in alphabet Ẑ. The decoder employs the decoding function,
F(· ; ϕ) : CK×1 → RN ×1 , to map ẑ into an estimate of the original signal for reconstruction,
given by
                                            ŝ = F (z; ϕ) ∈ RN ×1 ,                                   (2)

where ϕ denotes the trainable parameters of the decoder. Additionally, ŝ = [ŝ1 , ŝ1 , ..., ŝN ] is
regarded as a realization of the random variable Ŝ, in alphabet Ŝ.
  We further define the semantic communication system as a tuple of mappings:

                  F(·; θ) : S → Z,          H(·; H, σ 2 ) : Z → Ẑ,       F(·; ϕ) : Ẑ → Ŝ.          (3)

Considering the image transmission application, we further define the following block-wise
quadratic-distortion measure function for the source,
                                                                      K
                                                               1 X
                         dS : S × Ŝ → R,         dS (s, ŝ) ≜       dS (si , ŝi ) .                 (4)
                                                               K i=1

B. Outage for Semantic Communication

  We observe that deep learning-based semantic communication systems typically achieve sig-
nificantly different reconstruction quality on different input images, in which case some images
                                                                                                     8



will be transmitted with considerably low quality. This reminds us that the average performance
metrics, e.g., the average PSNR, will fail to characterize the true end-to-end performance of such
semantic communication systems. The main reasons can be further summarized as follows:
  •   The semantic communication model for image transmission generally achieves different
      performance over different samples, where some images will be reconstructed with rather
      low quality, leading to high uncertainty and lack of performance guarantee.
  •   It is hard to perceive the distortion when the difference between the original image and
      the reconstructed image is sufficiently small. Hence, for human perception requirements,
      images are expected to be transmitted with distortion less than the minimum threshold.
  •   Since deep learning-based methods generally suffer from poor generalization ability and
      reliability, there is often the case that the model cannot handle images from new distributions,
      resulting in poor reliability. Thus, for applications with high reliability requirements, the
      average distortion measure may not be suitable.
  When communicating over quasi-static fading channels at a given rate R, the random fading
coefficients may occasionally be very small, in which case the Shannon capacity is zero. For
reliable transmission over this kind of channels, it is desirable that the transmission rate is less
than the channel capacity [32]–[34]. It can be interpreted as the probability of failed transmission
with high BER, referring to outage probability. However, the outage of conventional communi-
cation systems is not able to characterize the outage performance of semantic communication
systems. It is mainly because the performance of a semantic communication system is highly
related to the source content and model capability. In this case, the transmission failure event is
also source-dependent, but the conventional outage only considers channel factors. Therefore, it
is necessary to define the outage in semantic communication by considering both sources and
channels.

C. SDOP Definition

  Intuitively, the event that some images cannot be reconstructed with a distortion less than the
target threshold can be regarded as a transmission failure and inspires us to define the outage
in semantic communications. Mirroring results of the excess distortion probability from joint
source-channel coding [33], [34], we propose a new metric called SDOP, which is defined as
the probability that the instantaneous distortion is larger than the target quality-of-service (QoS)
                                                                                                   9



distortion. Revisiting the probabilistic model shown in Fig. 2, the conditional probability, p(ŝ|s)
can be expressed as p(ŝ|s) = pθ (z|s)pẐ|Z (ẑ|z)pϕ (ŝ|z), where pθ and pϕ are defined by the
encoder and decoder, respectively. As we adopt a deterministic DeepSC-MIMO, pθ and pϕ can
be viewed as a Dirac-delta function for simplicity. Thus, we can define the erroneous set of
(s, z) that violates the distortion constraints, Dth , as

                          E = {(s, z) ∈ S × Z : dS (s, F (ẑ; ϕ)) > Dth } .                      (5)

Therefore, the SDOP can be defined as the probability of exceeding the distortion constraint,
Dth , which is expressed as
                                 Z                Z
                        P{E} ≜           pS (s)            pẐ|Z (ẑ | F (s; θ)) dzds,           (6)
                                   s∈S            z∈E(s)

where E(s) = {ẑ ∈ Ẑ : (s, ẑ) ∈ E}.
  Considering a semantic communication system with MIMO, according to (6), the channel
transition probability pẐ|Z , is related to the channel realization H and the variance of additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) σ 2 . Therefore, denoting the distortion as a random variable, D,
it will be a random variable that depends on the channel realization, noise variance, and input
image. Hence, (6) can be further denoted by

                                  P{E} ≜ P D(s, H, σ 2 ) > Dth ,
                                          
                                                                                                 (7)

representing the probability that the distortion is larger than the threshold. Compared with the
conventional outage, it considers both the source and channel, and thus is able to capture the
true outage of the semantic communication system.


                              III. P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK OF SCAN

  In this section, we present the framework of the proposed SCAN. The proposed SCAN con-
sists of the DeepSC-MIMO for image transmission, the performance evaluator for performance
prediction, and the channel feedback scheme for precoding.


A. DeepSC-MIMO

  1) Overview and Settings: By implementing the probabilistic model shown in Fig. 2 with
actual DNNs, the DeepSC-MIMO can be carried out as shown by the DeepSC-MIMO encoder
                                                                                                                                    10


                                                             Compression Indicator [2,4,5,…]


                              Compression    CSI Decoder             Feedback Link                         CSI Encoder
                                Decision


      Performance                                                         Fading               Estimated
       Evaluator                                                         Channel


                              DeepSC-MIMO                                                                            DeepSC-MIMO
                                Encoder       Precoder                                            Detection            Decoder

    High          Low
  Complexity   Complexity


                            Transmitter                                                                       Receiver


                                      Fig. 3: Framework of the proposed SCAN.


and DeepSC-MIMO decoder in Fig. 3. In particular, s is encoded directly into z by the encoder,
which we then elaborate how to transmit to the receiver using MIMO. Let V ∈ CNr ×d denote
the precoder to transmit z, where d denotes the number of data streams. It can be obtained
by applying the singular value decomposition (SVD) precoding with the channel matrix, H ∈
CNr ×Nt . Note that the image is encoded by the encoder into a K-dimension vector, i.e., the
complex channel symbols. We split them into a number of signals, whose dimensions all equal
to d. Taking one split signal, x ∈ Cd×1 , as an example, we first constrain it with power, P , as
∥Vx∥2 ≤ P . Then, the received signal can be denoted as

                                                     y = HVx + n,                                                                  (8)

where n ∈ CNr ×1 is the AWGN. At the receiver, we consider the linear receive combiner, thus
the estimated signal is obtained by
                                                           x̂ = UH y,                                                              (9)

where the U is obtained by the receiver using H with SVD algorithm. Finally, the received
signals are further processed by the decoder to recover the source image. Moreover, the average
SNR at the receiver is defined by
                                                           E {∥HVx∥2 }           P
                                    SNR ≜ 10 log10                 2
                                                                       = 10 log10 2 .                                          (10)
                                                             E {∥n∥ }            σ
  2) Architecture Design and Training: The proposed DeepSC-MIMO consists of the encoder
and decoder at the transmitter and receiver, respectively. We leverage the convolutional layer
and residual block to design the encoder and decoder. The details are illustrated in Fig. 4.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11



         Encoder                                                                                                                                                                                    CFA module

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (c,1)             (c,1)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Conv

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MLP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MLP
                                                            Block(stride=1)




                                                                                           Block(stride=1)




                                                                                                                              Normalization
           Conv (PReLU)


                           Conv (PReLU)




                                                                                                             Conv (PReLU)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (1,)




                                                                              CFA module
             3×3×16/1


                             3×3×32/2


                                              module




                                                                                                               3×3×c/2
                                                                ResNet




                                                                                               ResNet
                                                                                                                                                                                        (2,Nr,Nt)




                                                                                                                                 Power
                                                                                                                                                            Phase 1




                                               CFA
 Input
                                                                                                                                                                                          (c,1)




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Shared MLP
                                                                                                                                                                           MaxPool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (c,1)            (c,1)                   (c,1,1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sigmoid
                                                                                                                                                                           AvgPool        (c,1)
                                                                                                                                                        (c,h,w)


                                                                                                                                                            Phase 2
                                                                                                                                                                                       (1,h,w)
                                                                                                                                                                      MaxPool
                                                            Wireless Channel                                                                                                                                             (4,h,w)            (1,h,w)                     (1,h,w)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Conv
                                                                                                                                                                                              Concat                                                        Sigmoid
                                                                                                                                                                      AvgPool
                                                                                                                                                        (c,h,w)                       (1,h,w)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (2,h,w)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reshape
                                                                                                                                                                                   (1,h,w)                                 (1,h,w)                                              (c,h,w)




                                                                                                                                                                    Conv

                                                                                                                                                                             MLP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MLP
                                                                                                                                                                                              Concat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (1,)




                                                                                                                              Transformation
                           Block(stride=1)




                                                            Block(stride=1)
           Tconv (PReLU)




                                                                                           Tconv (PReLU)


                                                                                                             Tconv (PReLU)
                                               CFA module




                                                                              CFA module




                                                                                                                                                        (2,Nr,Nt)
                                                                                             3×3×16/2


                                                                                                                3×3×3/1

                                                                                                                                 Reshape
              3×3×c/2

                               ResNet




                                                                ResNet




                                                                                                                                               Output                                              ResNet Block




                                                                                                                                                                                   3×3×16/1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3×3×16/1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PReLU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PReLU
                                                                                                                                                                                     Conv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Conv
                                                                                                                             Decoder                                 (c,h,w)                                                                               (c,h,w)



                                             Fig. 4: The architecture of DeepSC-MIMO with MIMO channel.


   To make the DeepSC-MIMO adapt to different channel conditions, we develop a channel and
feature attention (CFA) module. The CFA module is developed based on the channel and spatial
block attention mechanism [35]. To make the DeepSC-MIMO adapt to the MIMO channels
and improve the performance, we incorporate the CSI matrix H and the noise variance σ 2 into
DeepSC-MIMO with a two-phase attention design, as shown in Fig. 4. In the first phase, H and
σ 2 are first processed to obtain the corresponding channel features. Then, the channel features
and image features are employed to generate the channel-wise attention mask, Mc ∈ R. Then,
the mask is used to allocate different weights to different feature channels of F1 , given by
F2 = F1 ⊙ Mc , where ⊙ denotes Hadamard product. By integrating the CSI matrix and noise
variance into the design, the DeepSC-MIMO is expected to adjust the encoder output to better fit
the MIMO channel. In the second phase, we adopt F2 , H, and σ 2 to generate the spatial attention
mask, M, which is used to assign different weights for the elements in each feature channel,
given as F3 = F2 ⊙ Mp . In this way, DeepSC-MIMO adapts to channel and noise variations by
adaptively allocating more power to more important features according to CSI matrix and noise
variance.
   Assuming that each data si is sampled from a given dataset and CSI data Hi is sampled from a
given distribution, we input them into the encoder. Then, we obtain the encoded channel symbols,
                                                                                                              12



 Algorithm 1: Training algorithm for DeepSC-MIMO
     Input : The training dataset S, consisting of the input image si , batch size Q, AWGN variance σ 2 ,
                 epochs M , and codeword length B.
     Output: The parameters of the trained model
1    Sample a batch of data, s1 , s2 , ..., sQ .
2    Generate a batch of CSI matrices, H1 , H2 , ..., HB . from the given distribution.
3    Generate a batch of noise samples, n1 , n2 , ..., nB , according to variance, σ 2 .
4    for m ← 1 to M do
 5         for i ← 1 to Q do
                                                                         
 6               Compute encoded channel symbols zi = F si , Hi , σ 2 ; θ .
 7               Compute received symbols ẑi = H (zi ; Hi , B, ni ).
                                                                          
 8               Comput the reconstructed image ŝi = F ẑi , Hi , σ 2 ; ϕ .
 9         end
10         Calculate the average loss based on (11).
11         Update the parameters of DeepSC-MIMO.
12   end



zi = F (si , Hi , σ 2 ; θ). The transmission process is modeled as the channel layer and the received
symbols can be denoted as ẑi = H (zi ; Hi , ni ), where ni represents the noise sample of AWGN.
Subsequently, the decoder decodes zi into the reconstructed image, ŝi = F (z, Hi , σ 2 ; ϕ). To
jointly learn the encoder and decoder via back-propagation, we employ the mean square-error
(MSE) loss, which is given by
                                                                N
                                                           1 X
                                               L (s, ŝ) =       (sj − ŝj )2 ,                             (11)
                                                           N j=1

where sj and ŝj denote the i-th elements of s and ŝ, respectively. Moreover, the detailed training
procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.


B. Design of Channel Feedback

     1) Encoder and Decoder for Channel Feedback: Assuming perfect CSI is known by the
receiver, the number of feedback elements for the considered MIMO channel should be Nr × Nt
without compressing. In [27], it has been proven that the deep learning-based methods are more
                                                                                                  13



effective in dealing with the sparse input. Therefore, we sparsify the channel in the beam space
domain using a 2D discrete Fourier transform (DFT) [36], which is given by

                                          H̃ = Fr HFH
                                                    l ,                                        (12)

where Fr ∈ CNr ×Nr and Fl ∈ CNt ×Nt denote the DFT matrices, respectively. Moreover, Fr and
Fl are both unitary matrices and H̃ is a sparse matrix. Note that H̃ is a complex matrix, we
transform it into a matrix of real numbers as

                                                  e T,
                                                  
                                    e = Re H
                                    H      e , Im H                                            (13)

where operations Re(·) and Im(·) represent obtaining the real and imaginary parts of the complex
matrix, respectively.
  We design the CSI encoder as Ge (·), the CSI matrix is transformed into a B-dimensional
codeword as zh = Ge (H),
                     e where B < 2Nr Nt . Then, the codeword is sent to the transmitter and

the CSI decoder is designed as Gd (·), which is employed to transform the codeword into the
                               e = Gd (zh ). After receiving H
original channel matrix, i.e., H                             e at the transmitter, the CSI matrix

in the spatial-angle domain can be obtained by inverse DFT. Finally, the recovered CSI matrix
is used for the precoding design for DeepSC-MIMO. As we aim to achieve adaptive channel
feedback according to the predicted reconstruction quality, the encoder needs to implement
multi-rate compression. That is, the CSI encoder should be able to compress the CSI matrix into
different length values.
  2) Adaptive Channel Feedback: We consider the case where all transmitted images are re-
quired to be reconstructed to exceed a given minimum target PSNR threshold. It is worth
emphasizing that the performance metric of image transmission usually selects PSNR, which
is in fact the inversion of the quadratic-distortion. Then, the images with lower reconstruction
quality, i.e., higher distortion, are generally less robust to the disturbances. This inspires us to
re-determine the transmission resource allocation of the DeepSC-MIMO system by making a
trade-off between the allocated transmission resource and the reconstruction quality according
to the reconstruction quality of the images. Based on this observation, we aim to develop an
adaptive channel feedback scheme to reduce the overhead of channel feedback while maintaining
a satisfactory SDOP, i.e., guaranteeing more images whose reconstruction quality is greater than
a given target PSNR threshold.
                                                                                                 14



  As shown in Fig. 3, the transmitter will determine the compression level of the CSI matrix
based on the reconstruction quality of the given image and send a compression indicator to
indicate the compression level. Then, the receiver compresses the CSI matrix according to the
compression indicator, and feeds the compressed CSI codeword back to the transmitter through
the feedback link for precoding. In order to know the reconstruction quality in advance so that
the transmitter can determine the compression level, we propose a performance evaluator at the
transmitter. The details about the performance evaluator and the adaptive design are presented
in Sections IV and V, respectively.


             IV. K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION -BASED P ERFORMANCE E VALUATOR

  In this section, we present the detailed designs of the proposed performance evaluator based
on knowledge distillation.


A. Performance Influencing Factors

  To the best of our knowledge, the reconstruction quality of each image mainly depends on
three factors, image content, channel condition, and model capability. The specific explanations
are listed below:
  •   Image complexity: The knowledge about the complexity of image generally determines
      the image redundancy, and is of great importance in many applications. It can be used to
      indicate the compression ratio of an image, since images with low complexity are easier to
      compress than images with high complexity [37].
  •   Transmission errors: We consider MIMO communication, where inaccurate precoding caused
      by the CSI compression will negatively affect on the reconstruction quality. Nevertheless,
      AWGN also has an impact on the symbol transmission, resulting in the performance degra-
      dation. Therefore, channel conditions need to be considered.
  •   Model capability: The information extraction ability of the model has a significant impact on
      the semantic communication performance of different inputs. In particular, the model tends
      to perform better on inputs similar to the training data. For example, if DeepSC-MIMO is
      trained on a series of images of dogs, there would be a performance degradation on the
      images of cars due to the unsatisfactory generalization ability.
                                                                                                 15


                                     Compute PSNR

                                                                                  PSNR Value
                    DeepSC-MIMO                       DeepSC-MIMO
                      Encoder                           Decoder


                                                                                    PSNR
                                       L2 Loss                          L2 Loss   Regression
                                                                                     Loss
                  Back Propagation



                   Performance                        Performance
                 Evaluator Encoder                  Evaluator Decoder             PSNR Value


                                     Compute PSNR


                                                         Residual
                                                    Correction Module


                   Fig. 5: Framework of the proposed performance evaluator.


B. Training with Knowledge Distillation

  Knowledge distillation has been widely used to transfer knowledge from teacher model to
student model [38]–[40]. Specifically, we can employ the student model to mimic the teacher
model, and the output of the student model can be regarded as an approximation of the output of
the teacher model. Thus, to predict the reconstruction quality of each given image, we propose
a lightweight learnable evaluator represented by DNNs. The architecture of the performance
evaluator is shown in Fig. 5. Similar to DeepSC-MIMO, the proposed evaluator is designed as
an autoencoder structure with a residual correction module, which is beneficial to imitate the
behavior of DeepSC-MIMO.
  We employ the encoder and decoder parts of the performance evaluator to generate the
predicted reconstructed image, sp , which can be regarded as an approximation of the output
of DeepSC-MIMO, st . Then, the reconstruction PSNR value, γp = ∥sp − s∥2 , can be taken as
the prediction of the ground-truth PSNR value achieved by DeepSC-MIMO, γt = ∥st − s∥2 . The
training target of the proposed performance evaluator can be formulated as a regression problem,
that is
                                          min Lc ≜ (γt − γp )2 ,                               (14)
                                             π

where π denotes the trainable parameters of the performance evaluator. To improve the prediction
accuracy, we further develop an additional distillation loss on the intermediate features of the
performance evaluator. In particular, the trained DeepSC-MIMO is set as the teacher to help
the performance evaluator to learn to better predict the reconstruction quality of the image.
                                                                                                                  16



As presented in Fig. 5, the additional distillation loss is designed to encourage the features of
the student model, performance evaluator, to be similar to that of the teacher model, DeepSC-
MIMO. That is, we calculate the Frobenius norm of the difference between the features of the
performance evaluator and DeepSC-MIMO as the measure of similarity. Assuming that the output
encoded feature of DeepSC-MIMO is Ft and the output encoded features of the performance
evaluator is Fp . Denote the output images of DeepSC-MIMO and the performance evaluator as
st and sp , respectively. Then, the additional distillation loss is designed to increase the similarity
and can be written as
                                       Lp = ∥sp − st ∥2 + ∥Fp − Ft ∥22 .                                       (15)

Intuitively, the additional distillation loss makes the performance evaluator learn the properties
of DeepSC-MIMO, so that the performance evaluator has the similar model capability to the
performance evaluator. For instance, if DeepSC-MIMO performs better on the images of dogs
than on images of cats, the performance evaluator should also be so, in which way the PSNR
value can be predicted more accurately.
  Since the PSNR value of each image is also related to the CSI codeword length and noise
variance, we further introduce a residual correction module to predict the PSNR loss caused by
the transmission procedure. In particular, the proposed residual correction module takes s, B,
and σ 2 as input, and outputs the predicted PSNR loss, which is denoted as γd . Therefore, as
shown in Fig. 5, the predicted PSNR value of the performance evaluator can be redefined as
γp = ∥sp − s∥2 + γd . Therefore, the total loss can be denoted by

                                                L = λLc + Lp ,                                                 (16)

where λ is the weighting hyperparameter. In order to train performance evaluator, we establish
the dataset based on a trained DeepSC-MIMO. Specifically, the dataset consists of a number of
tuples with the form (si , Hi , Bi , σi2 , γti , Fit , sit ), where γti , Fit , and sit are obtained by inputting si
and Hi to DeepSC-MIMO. Moreover, with (16), we apply the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
algorithm to update the parameters of the predictor.

                      V. P ROPOSED A DAPTIVE C HANNEL F EEDBACK D ESIGN

  In this section, we introduce the proposed adaptive channel feedback design. In particular,
the instance-wise adaptive design is developed to adaptively select the optimal CSI compression
                                                                                                  17



level based on the predicted PSNR value for each image. Moreover, the group-wise adaptive
scheme is proposed to determine the CSI compression levels of a group of images within the
average length constraint.


A. Instance-Wise Design

  In the following, we focus on the limited feedback scenario, where only the compressed
CSI fed back with the codeword of a certain length is known at the transmitter. Besides, to
help the transmitter predict the distortion, a very short codeword is fed back to the transmitter
firstly, whose length is much less than that of really-required codewords. In this case, the channel
transformation function can be extended to H (·; H, B, σ 2 ) by involving with the codeword length
B. Note that the difference between the recovered CSI matrix Ĥ, and real CSI matrix H is
measured by the normalized mean squared error (NMSE) [27], which can be computed as
                                          (            )
                                            ∥H − Ĥ∥22
                              NMSE = E                   .                          (17)
                                               ∥H∥22
In particular, a smaller B will lead to better feedback accuracy, i.e., higher NMSE, which will
cause the performance degradation of DeepSC-MIMO. Although increasing the codeword length
of the CSI matrix helps reduce the difference, it would result in high feedback overhead. Thus,
there is a trade-off between the feedback overhead and system performance. To realize adaptive
channel feedback design, we first design an adaptive channel feedback regime with T -level
compressed length, given as Λ = {L1 , L2 , ..., LT }, where L1 < L2 < ... < LT are the optional
codeword length values.
  Then, for each input image, the target can be formulated to minimize the SDOP by choosing
appropriate codeword length. In fact, this can be achieved by solving the following optimization
problem,

                                P1 : min B,                                                   (18a)

                                      s.t.   D̂(s, H, B, σ 2 ) ≤ Dth ,                        (18b)

                                             B ∈ Λ,                                           (18c)

where D̂(·) denotes the predicted distortion. In addition, constraint (18b) ensures that the dis-
tortion of each individual reconstructed image is not greater than the target distortion Dth .
Constraint (18c) indicates that optional CSI compression levels are selected from the given
                                                                                               18



set, Λ. Moreover, D(·) is a monotonically decreasing function of B. In this way, according to
the predicted D̂(s, H, B, σ 2 ), the optimal codeword length, B ∗ , can be acquired by computing
the predicted performance on different codeword length values with the performance evaluator.
In general, it is an instance-wise method, and thus the CSI codeword length for each given image
is immediately available.


B. Group-Wise Design

  In addition to the instance-wise adaptive applications, there is also the case that a group of
images are required to wait for transmission. Therefore, we further investigate the group-wise
adaptive design aiming to ensure that more images are transmitted over a group of images
with less distortion than a target threshold, i.e., minimize SDOP. Firstly, we assume that there
are M images, {sm }M
                   m=1 , for transmission and the optional CSI codeword length values are

Λ = {L1 , L2 , ..., LT }, where L1 < L2 < ... < LT . We focus on minimizing the SDOP with an
average codeword length constraint. Specifically, the target can be formulated as the following
problem,
                                              M
                                    1 X                             
                    P2 : min P{E} ≜       δ D̂(s, H, Bm , σ 2 ) > Dth ,                    (19a)
                                    M m=1
                                      M
                                   1 X
                            s.t.         Bm ≤ Lth ,                                        (19b)
                                   M m=1
                                   Bm ∈ Λ,                                                 (19c)

                                   sm ∈ S,                                                 (19d)

where δ(·) equals 1 when the condition is satisfied, and 0 otherwise. The objective function can
be interpreted as the ratio of the images with a distortion above the threshold, which can be
further viewed as an empirical estimation of P {E}. Moreover, constraint (19b) is an average
constraint ensuring that the feedback overhead is infinite, Lth denotes the constraint satisfying
L1 ≤ Lth ≤ LT .
  We then investigate ways to solve (19) in order to achieve the group-wise adaptive design.
                                                              
Firstly, we denote the predicted δ D̂(sm , H, Bm , σ 2 ) > Dth of the m-th sample choosing Lt
                                                                               
as the CSI codeword length as Gm,t . The value of δ D̂(sm , H, Bm , σ 2 ) > Dth is drawn from
set {0, 1}, which is determined by comparing the predicted D̂ (sm , H, Bm , σ 2 ) with Dth . To
solve the problem, we propose a bottom-up water-filling algorithm. Specifically, we respectively
                                                                                                                        19



 Algorithm 2: Group-wise adaptive method.
                                  M
     Input : M images, {sm }m=1 , optional CSI compression levels, Λ = {L1 , L2 , ..., LT }, and the predicted
                 determination of excessing the distortion event, Gm,l for m = 1, ..., M and l = 1, ..., L.
     Output: Optimized P{E} and the allocation strategy Ω.
1    Initialize index list, I = {1, 2, ..., M }, to indicate the index of image that has not been determined with
      the compression level.
2    Initialize an empty list, K, to indicate which image have been allocated with proper codeword length.
3    Initialize the allocation set Ω[i] = L1 , for i = 1, ..., M , i.e., allocates the shortest codeword length for M
      images.
4    for t = 1, ..., T do
 5         for i in I do
 6               clear K.
 7               if Gi,t = 0:
 8                 Assign Ω[i] = Lt .
                      1
                        PM
 9                 if M   m=1 Ω[m] > Lth :

10                    Assign Ω[i] = Lt−1 .
11                    break
12                 Add i to K.
13               Remove all elements of K from the index set, I.
14               if I is empty:
15                 break
16         end
17   end



search the M images and assign the codeword length for each image by drawing the smallest
but suitable Bm from Λ. In this way, the higher codeword length will be prioritized to allocate
to the images that are least likely to exceed the threshold, while images that cannot meet the
distortion requirement for any compression level will be discarded. Moreover, when constraint
(19b) is unsatisfied, we terminate the algorithm and return the allocation results, Ω. Then, the
transmitter will send Ω represented by the indicator to the receiver to indicate the codeword
length for each CSI matrix. The detailed procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2.
                                                                                                                 20




                     Transmitter                             Receiver


                                       Model training
                                   Model online deployment                  Performance prediction and
                                                                        1
                                                                            determine the compression level

                                                                            Compress the CSI matrix according
                                                                        2
                      1                                                     to the compression level indicator
                                                                   H
                                                                            Recover the CSI and perform
                                                                        3
                                                                            precoding

                                                                            Reconstruct the image based on
                                                                   2    4
                                                                            the received symbol




                      3



                                                                   4



                              Fig. 6: Communication process of SCAN.


C. Communication Process of SCAN

  We aim at adaptively adjusting the overhead of MIMO channel feedback for DeepSC-MIMO
based on the predicted distortion. We train the proposed models, including DeepSC-MIMO,
performance evaluator, and CSI model before deployment. The communication process of the
semantic-aware adaptive channel feedback scheme is shown in Fig. 6, and described as follows.
 (i) The transmitter determines the compression level based on the complexity of the images,
     and transmits the compression indicator, r, to indicate the compression level, consisting of
     log2 L bits.
(ii) The receiver compresses the estimated channel, H ∈ CNr ×Nt , according to the indicator
     and feeds back the CSI codeword to the transmitter.
(iii) The transmitter recovers the CSI matrix with the CSI codeword to obtain the recovered Ĥ.
     It then transmits the precoded data symbols to the receiver by performing precoding with
     Ĥ.
(iv) The receiver reconstructs the image based on the received symbol vector ẑ.
Furthermore, since we simultaneously determine the CSI codeword length for a group of images
in the group-wise design, the transmitter will immediately send M log2 L bits to the receiver to
indicate the compression levels of the M images.
                                                                                               21



                                  VI. S IMULATION R ESULTS

A. Simulation Setup

  In the simulation, we consider a transmitter equipped with Nt = 16 transmit antennas and a
receiver equipped with Nr = 16 receive antennas. The number of streams is d = 2. We employ
the popular narrowband millimeter wave (mmWave) clustered channel [41]. We implement the
proposed DeepSC-MIMO and the deep learning-based channel feedback scheme with the deep
learning platform “Pytorch”. The “Adam” optimizer is employed, with the batch size of 128.
Moreover, the initial learning rate is 0.0005 and will be reduced with the increase of the number
of epochs. We use the CIFAR10 dataset which consists of 50, 000 color images of size 32×32×3
in the training dataset and 10, 000 images in the test dataset.
  As for channel feedback, we employ the CLNet [28], which proposes a forged complex-valued
input layer to process CSI data and utilizes spatial-attention to improve the performance. Given
a codeword length, the encoder of CLNet compresses the CSI into a low-dimensional latent
vector. Moreover, the optional codeword length is set as Λ = [32, 64, 96, 128, 160, 192], unless
otherwise specified. To evaluate the performance of the DeepSC-MIMO, PSNR is chosen for
distortion metric. It measures the ratio between the maximum possible power and the noise,
which can be calculated by
                                                    MAX2
                                 PSNR = 10 log10         (dB),                              (20)
                                                    MSE
where MSE = d(s, ŝ) represents the mean square-error (MSE) between the source image, s,
and the reconstructed image, ŝ. Moreover, MAX is the maximum possible value of the pixels,
e.g., MAX equals 255 for the images of RGB format. PSNR can be viewed as the inverse of
the distortion. For comparison, we adopt the BPG source coding and the advanced low-density
parity-check (LDPC) channel coding. The 16QAM and 4QAM are selected as the modulation
schemes. Moreover, we also compare the DeepSC-MIMO with the classic DJSCC proposed in
[4].


B. Performance of DeepSC-MIMO

  Fig. 7 presents the performance of the investigated schemes equipped with different numbers of
antennas versus the SNR and we assume that the transmitter obtains the perfect CSI. In addition,
“(16,16)” indicates Nr = 16 and Nt = 16, and the other notations can be understood in a similar
                                                                                                                                                22




                           Channel bandwidth ratio = 1/16                                        Channel bandwidth ratio = 1/24
                                                                                    31
              34

              31                                                                    28

              28
                                                                                    25
    PSNR/dB




                                                                          PSNR/dB
              25
                                                                                    22
              22                                DeepSC-MIMO (16, 16)                                                  DeepSC-MIMO (16, 16)
                                                DeepSC-MIMO (8, 8)                                                    DeepSC-MIMO (8, 8)
                                                DJSCC (16, 16)                                                        DJSCC (16, 16)
                                                DJSCC (8, 8)                        19                                DJSCC (8, 8)
              19                                BPG+LDPC+16QAM (16, 16)                                               BPG+LDPC+16QAM (16, 16)
                                                BPG+LDPC+16QAM (8, 8)                                                 BPG+LDPC+16QAM (8, 8)
                                                BPG+LDPC+4QAM (16, 16)                                                BPG+LDPC+4QAM (16, 16)
                                                BPG+LDPC+4QAM (8, 8)                                                  BPG+LDPC+4QAM (8, 8)
              16                                                                    16
                   6   3     0     3     6      9     12     15     18                   6   3     0     3     6      9     12     15     18
                                       SNR/dB                                                                SNR/dB
                                       (a)                                                                   (b)

Fig. 7: Performance versus SNR comparison of DeepSC-MIMO, DJSCC, and BPG+LDPC
transmission methods under different numbers of antennas and channel bandwidth ratio.


way. We train the proposed DeepSC-MIMO model with SNR = 18 dB and test it in SNR
from −6 dB to 18 dB. It is readily seen that the PSNR achieved by DeepSC-MIMO increases
with SNR. The system equipped with more antennas generally outperforms the system with
fewer antennas. We also observe that DeepSC-MIMO can achieve relatively better performance
than the standard separate coding scheme, especially in the low SNR regime. Besides, since we
incorporate the CSI and channel noise into DeepSC-MIMO, it outperforms DJSCC in all SNR
regimes. This is because the adaptive design is beneficial for exploiting the CSI information
and allocating different power to different sub-channels. In addition, by comparing the results in
Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 7(b), we find that the performance gain exists in different channel bandwidth
ratios.
  We also investigate the performance of adaptive design. In particular, we train DeepSC-MIMO
with codeword length of 64, 96, and 128, in the scenario where SNR is uniformly sampled from
[6, 18] dB, and test the model in different SNR regimes. The results are given by DeepSC-MIMO-
A in Fig. 8. In addition, the model trained in the fixed SNR is denoted as DeepSC-MIMO-S.
It is demonstrated that there is a slight performance loss for DeepSC-MIMO-A compared with
                                                                                                  23



                                                  Channel bandwidth ratio = 1/16
                                     34

                                     32

                                     30




                           PSNR/dB
                                     28

                                     26                                DeepSC-MIMO-S: B = 128
                                                                       DeepSC-MIMO-A: B = 128
                                                                       DeepSC-MIMO-S: B = 96
                                     24                                DeepSC-MIMO-A: B = 96
                                                                       DeepSC-MIMO-S: B = 64
                                                                       DeepSC-MIMO-A: B = 64
                                     22
                                          6   3     0     3     6      9     12     15    18
                                                              SNR/dB

Fig. 8: The performance of proposed DeepSC-MIMO at different SNR regimes and CSI
compression levels.


DeepSC-MIMO-S and the performance loss increases with SNR. Although there exists certain
performance degradation, the adaptive design is still of significance in view of that it reduces the
training time. Moreover, the performance gap between DeepSC-MIMO-A and DeepSC-MIMO-S
increases with the codeword length. This is because the model is more sensitive to the disturbance
in the case with high PSNR.


C. Accuracy of Performance Evaluator

  To evaluate the accuracy of the performance evaluator, we randomly select 200 images from
the test dataset and calculate the predicted PSNR values and the ground-truth PSNR values.
The images are sorted from small to large according to the ground-truth PSNR values and
the results are shown in Fig. 9. From the figure, we observe that the performance evaluator
can accurately predict PSNR values with rather low prediction error. Besides, we compute the
average prediction error on 200 images as denoted by MSE marked in the figure. As we can
see, the prediction error in the low SNR regime is larger than that in the high SNR regime.
Moreover, the predicted PSNR of the performance evaluator is approaching the ground-truth
values for the images with either high or low reconstruction quality. That is, the performance
evaluator has successfully learnt to cope with the training bias of the model. According to
                                                                                                                                                                                                             24




                    SNR=15dB                                              SNR=9dB                                              SNR=6dB                                              SNR=3dB
      38                                                   38                                                   38                                                   38

      35                                                   35                                                   35                                                   35

      32     MSE=0.657                                     32     MSE=0.530                                     32     MSE=0.479                                     32      MSE=0.735
PSNR/dB




                                                     PSNR/dB




                                                                                                          PSNR/dB




                                                                                                                                                               PSNR/dB
      29                                                   29                                                   29                                                   29

      26                                                   26                                                   26                                                   26

      23                                                   23                                                   23                                                   23
                                  Predicted PSNR                                       Predicted PSNR                                       Predicted PSNR                                       Predicted PSNR
                                  Groud-truth PSNR                                     Groud-truth PSNR                                     Groud-truth PSNR                                     Groud-truth PSNR
      20 0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                  20 0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                  20 0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                  20 0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                          Index                                                Index                                                Index                                                Index

                          (a)                                                  (b)                                                  (c)                                              (d)

                         B=160                                                B=128                                                B=64                                              B=48
      38                                                   38                                                   38                                                   38

      35                                                   35                                                   35                                                   35

              MSE=0.704                                            MSE=0.803                                            MSE=0.687                                            MSE=0.734
      32                                                   32                                                   32                                                   32
PSNR/dB




                                                     PSNR/dB




                                                                                                          PSNR/dB




                                                                                                                                                               PSNR/dB
      29                                                   29                                                   29                                                   29

      26                                                   26                                                   26                                                   26

      23                                                   23                                                   23                                                   23
                                  Predicted PSNR                                       Predicted PSNR                                       Predicted PSNR                                       Predicted PSNR
                                  Groud-truth PSNR                                     Groud-truth PSNR                                     Groud-truth PSNR                                     Groud-truth PSNR
      20 0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                  20 0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                  20 0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                  20 0   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                          Index                                                Index                                                Index                                                Index

                          (e)                                                  (f)                                                  (g)                                              (h)

   Fig. 9: Prediction performance of the proposed performance evaluator. The first column shows
   the predicted PSNR value and the ground-truth PSNR value in different SNRs. The second
   column shows the predicted PSNR value and the ground-truth PSNR value in different CSI
   codeword length.


   the second column of Fig. 9, the prediction error decreases with CSI codeword length. Most
   importantly, the reconstruction quality of these images are shown to be quite different from each
   other. Although the performance is close to average for the majority of images (about 70%),
   there are still some images where the reconstruction quality is rather low, introducing significant
   unreliability. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the way to improve the performance of
   these images adaptively in semantic communications.
           In Fig. 10, we perform experiments on different CSI codeword length values. Specifically,
   in Fig. 10(a), we compare the average ground-truth PSNR values and average predicted PSNR
   values achieved by DeepSC-MIMO and performance evaluator, respectively. We can observe
   that the predicted PSNR values are close to the ground-truth PSNR values. In Fig. 10(b), we
   calculate the prediction MSE on different CSI codeword length values versus SNR. In general,
                                                                                                                             25




                                   Channel bandwidth ratio = 1/16                       2.0 Channel bandwidth ratio = 1/16
                                             Ground-truth: B = 160                                                 B = 128
                              34             Predicted: B = 160                                                    B = 160
                                             Ground-truth: B = 128                      1.8
                              33             Predicted: B = 128

                              32                                                        1.6

                              31                                                        1.4




                                                                       Prediction MSE
                    PSNR/dB   30
                                                                                        1.2
                              29
                              28                                                        1.0
                              27
                                                                                        0.8
                              26
                              25                                                        0.6
                              24
                                   6 3 0 3 6 9 12 15 18                                       6 3 0 3 6 9 12 15 18
                                              SNR/dB                                                   SNR/dB
                                              (a)                                                       (b)

Fig. 10: (a) The average ground-truth PSNR values and predicted PSNR values. (b) Prediction
MSE of performance evaluator versus SNR.

                                   TABLE I: Comparison of model parameters.

                                        Schemes            Prediction MSE                       Model parameters
                                      Basic model                    0.524                            0.311M
                                      Small model                    0.602                            0.142M
                                      Tiny model                     0.704                            0.058M
                                    DeepSC-MIMO                      ——                               0.488M



we can see that the prediction MSE decreases with SNR, but the prediction MSE increases with
SNR when SNR is lager than 6 dB. This is because we sample the SNR from −6 dB to 18 dB,
where the average SNR is 6 dB, Besides, when SNR is lager than 6 dB, the ground-truth PSNR
value will not significantly change with SNR. In this case, the performance evaluator tends to
output similar results when SNR is lager than 6 dB, confusing the training procedure. Moreover,
at relatively higher SNR regime, PSNR value can be predicted accurately by the performance
evaluator. In comparison, the PSNR value is hard to predict at low SNR regime since the received
features will be significantly disturbed by the noise, which makes the achieved PSNR vary over
a large range.
  Table I compares the numbers of model parameters of different schemes. It is observed that the
                                                                                                                                                                      26




                                 Channel bandwidth ratio = 1/16                         1.0               = [32, 48, 64, 96, 128]
                       256                      Predicited length ( th = 26dB)                                       Average length ( th = 26dB)
                                                Required length ( th = 26dB)                                         Average length ( th = 28dB) 120
                       224                      Predicited length ( th = 28dB)                                       Average length ( th = 30dB)
                                                Required length ( th = 28dB)            0.8                          SDOP ( th = 26dB)
                                                Predicited length ( th = 30dB)                                       SDOP ( th = 28dB)           100
                       192
                                                Required length ( th = 30dB)                                         SDOP ( th = 30dB)
  Compression length




                       160                                                                                                                      80




                                                                                                                                                     Average length
                                                                                        0.6




                                                                                 SDOP
                       128
                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                        0.4
                        96
                                                                                                                                                40
                        64
                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                20
                        32

                         0                                                              0.0                                                     0
                             6   3   0    3     6      9     12     15     18                 6   3   0      3      6     9    12    15    18
                                              SNR/dB                                                             SNR/dB
                                                (a)                                                                (b)

Fig. 11: Performance of instance-wise SCAN. (a) The achieved codeword length when targeting
for different PSNR thresholds. (b) The achieved SDOP and average required length when
targeting for different PSNR thresholds.


size of performance evaluator is much smaller than that of the DeepSC-MIMO, which shows
the effectiveness of knowledge distillation. Besides, we also observe that the larger model is
able to provide more accurate prediction results, hence the performance evaluator with proper
parameters can be selected for practical uses.


D. Results of SCAN

   In this subsection, we aim to evaluate the performance of the proposed adaptive channel
feedback scheme with respect to SDOP. The purpose is to adaptively adjust the channel feedback
overhead according to the predicted performance. Particularly, we compare the achieved SDOP
versus different target PSNR values, channel SNRs, and codeword length values. Moreover, the
overhead of channel feedback is controlled by adjusting the compressed CSI codeword length,
which is selected from the optional length set, Λ.
   In Fig. 11, we present the performance of the instance-wise adaptive design. In particular, we
randomly choose an image from the test dataset and consider 8 codeword length values, i.e.,
B ∈ Λ = [32, 64, 96, 128, 160, 192, 224, 256]. Then, we try to find the required minimal codeword
                                                                                                                                                                       27




                            100          Channel bandwidth ratio = 1/16, SNR = 18dB                                  Channel bandwidth ratio = 1/16, SNR = 18dB
                                                                                                                      DJSCC-fixed (B = 64)
                                                                                                       0.40           DJSCC-fixed (B = 96)
                             90                                                                                       DJSCC-fixed (B = 128)
                                                                                                                      SCAN (Lth = 64)
                             80
                                                                                                       0.35           SCAN (Lth = 96)
                                                                                                                      SCAN (Lth = 128)
  Average required length




                                                                                                       0.30
                             70                                                                               0.12
                                                                                                       0.25 0.10




                                                                                                SDOP
                             60                                                                               0.08
                                                                                                       0.20 0.06
                             50                                                                               0.04
                                                                                                       0.15 0.02
                                                                                                                25.00 25.25 25.50
                             40                                    Optinal = [96]
                                                                   Optinal = [64, 96]                  0.10
                                                                   Optinal = [40, 96]
                             30                                    Optinal = [40, 64, 96]              0.05
                                                                   Optinal = [32, 40, 64, 96]
                                                                   Optinal = [32, 40, 64]
                             20                                                                        0.00
                                  25.0       26.0   27.0    28.0    29.0 29.5 30.0 30.5 31.0                  25.0 25.5 26.0 26.5 27.0 27.5 28.0 28.5 29.0 29.5 30.0
                                                      Target PSNR/dB                                                                Target PSNR/dB
                                                           (a)                                                                          (b)

Fig. 12: Performance comparison of group-wise SCAN. (a) Average codeword length comparison
of SCAN with different optional length sets; (b) SDOP comparison between DJSCC and SCAN
when using the same codeword length versus SNR.


length according to the ground-truth PSNR value. For comparison, we employ the performance
evaluator to predict the PSNR value of this image and determine the predicted codeword length
when targeting for different PSNR values, including γth = 26 dB, γth = 28 dB, and γth = 30 dB.
The results are given in Fig. 11(a). From the figure, the performance evaluator can predict the
optimal codeword length accurately, which shows that the proposed SCAN can determine the
optimal CSI codeword length effectively. Moreover, it is also worth noting that the target can be
unachievable for any CSI codeword length, e.g., γth = 30 dB at SNR = −6 dB. In Fig. 11(b),
we calculate the overall SDOP when employing instance-wise scheme on all 10, 000 images.
Since a higher γth is harder to achieve, the SDOP decreases significantly with γth . Moreover,
the average required CSI codeword length also decreases with SNR, which demonstrates that
SCAN is a flexible scheme that enables variable rate feedback.
  In Fig. 12(a), we compare the average required codeword length when achieving the same
SDOP. Specifically, all the schemes are required to achieve the same SDOP as employing B =
96 for all the test images. From Fig. 12(a), it is readily seen that our proposed SCAN can
                                                                                                                           28



significantly reduce the feedback overhead while keeping the same SDOP. Furthermore, it is
shown that the feedback overhead can be reduced more with a larger codeword length set.
  To show the relative performance gain induced by the adaptive design, we compare SCAN
and the DJSCC with fixed codeword length overhead scheme. That is, we employ the group-wise
adaptive design and set the average length constraint, Bth , as 64, 96, and 128, respectively. Then,
we test the SDOP of DJSCC with fixed length by compressing the CSI for all images into the
same length. From Fig. 12(b), it is observed that SCAN can achieve a significantly lower SDOP
with the same average codeword length, demonstrating the superiority and flexibility of SCAN
for realizing a more reliable semantic communication system.


                                                VII. C ONCLUSION

  In this paper, we proposed a novel metric, SDOP, to capture the reliability of a semantic
communication system. Then, to improve the reliability of a semantic communication, we
developed a framework of SCAN including instance-wise and group-wise schemes, which are
able to adjust the CSI codeword length based on the PSNR value of the image. To realize SCAN,
we first proposed a semantic communication system, DeepSC-MIMO, for MIMO scenarios. We
then developed a performance evaluator based on knowledge distillation, which can accurately
predict the reconstruction quality of each image. Simulation results showed that the proposed
scheme can significantly improve the performance and reliability with much reduced feedback
overhead. Our proposed SCAN is a general framework and the future work could generalize
it to other modalities of data. Within the framework, more adaptive designs, such as adaptive
coding and adaptive modulation, can be potentially realized for higher performance gain.


                                                     R EFERENCES

[1] D. Gündüz, Z. Qin, I. E. Aguerri, H. S. Dhillon, Z. Yang, A. Yener, K. K. Wong, and C.-B. Chae, “Beyond transmitting
    bits: Context, semantics, and task-oriented communications,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 5–41,
    Jan. 2023.
[2] K. Niu, J. Dai, S. Yao, S. Wang, Z. Si, X. Qin, and P. Zhang, “A paradigm shift toward semantic communications,” IEEE
    Comm. Maga., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 113–119, Nov. 2022.
[3] W. Yang, H. Du, Z. Q. Liew, W. Y. B. Lim, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, X. Chi, X. Shen, and C. Miao, “Semantic communications
    for future internet: Fundamentals, applications, and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 213–250,
    2023.
                                                                                                                            29



 [4] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. Burth Kurka, and D. Gunduz, “Deep joint source-channel coding for wireless image transmission,”
     IEEE Trans. Cognit. Comm. Netw., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, Sep. 2019.
 [5] Z. Weng and Z. Qin, “Semantic communication systems for speech transmission,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 39,
     no. 8, pp. 2434–2444, Aug. 2021.
 [6] G. Zhang, Q. Hu, Z. Qin, Y. Cai, G. Yu, X. Tao, and G. Y. Li, “A unified multi-task semantic communication system for
     multimodal data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07689, 2022.
 [7] D. B. Kurka and D. Gunduz, “DeepJSCC-f: Deep joint source-channel coding of images with feedback,” IEEE J. Select.
     Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 178–193, May 2020.
 [8] Q. Hu, G. Zhang, Z. Qin, Y. Cai, G. Yu, and G. Y. Li, “Robust semantic communications with masked VQ-VAE enabled
     codebook,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., p. to appear, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TWC.2023.3265201.
 [9] J. Xu, B. Ai, W. Chen, A. Yang, P. Sun, and M. Rodrigues, “Wireless image transmission using deep source channel
     coding with attention modules,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 2315–2328, Apr. 2022.
[10] W. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Ma, H. Shao, N. Wang, and V. C. M. Leung, “Predictive and adaptive deep coding for
     wireless image transmission in semantic communication,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., p. to appear, 2023, doi:
     10.1109/TWC.2023.3234408.
[11] M. K. Farshbafan, W. Saad, and M. Debbah, “Curriculum learning for goal-oriented semantic communications with a
     common language,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 1430–1446, Mar. 2023.
[12] J. Liu, S. Shao, W. Zhang, and H. V. Poor, “An indirect rate-distortion characterization for semantic sources: General
     model and the case of gaussian observation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 5946–5959, Aug. 2022.
[13] Y. Shi, S. Shao, Y. Wu, W. Zhang, X.-G. Xia, and C. Xiao, “Excess distortion exponent analysis for semantic-aware MIMO
     communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., p. to appear, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TWC.2023.3238463.
[14] P. Jiang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Wireless semantic transmission via revising modules in conventional
     communications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00473, 2023.
[15] Z. Yang, M. Chen, Z. Zhang, and C. Huang, “Energy efficient semantic communication over wireless networks with rate
     splitting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.01987, 2023.
[16] M. Yang, C. Bian, and H.-S. Kim, “OFDM-guided deep joint source channel coding for wireless multipath fading channels,”
     IEEE Trans. Cognit. Comm. Netw., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 584–599, Jun. 2022.
[17] M. Wang, J. Li, M. Ma, and X. Fan, “Constellation design for deep joint source-channel coding,” IEEE Signal Process.
     Lett., vol. 29, pp. 1442–1446, Jun. 2022.
[18] P. Jiang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Deep source-channel coding for sentence semantic transmission with HARQ,”
     IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 5225–5240, Aug. 2022.
[19] H. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Li, K. Long, and A. Nallanathan, “DRL-driven dynamic resource allocation for task-oriented
     semantic communication,” IEEE Trans. Commun., p. to appear, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2023.3274145.
[20] J. Guo, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Overview of deep learning-based CSI feedback in massive MIMO systems,”
     IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 12, pp. 8017–8045, Dec. 2022.
[21] T. J. O’Shea, T. Erpek, and T. C. Clancy, “Deep learning based MIMO communications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.07980,
     2017.
[22] H. He, S. Jin, C.-K. Wen, F. Gao, G. Y. Li, and Z. Xu, “Model-driven deep learning for physical layer communications,”
     IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 77–83, Oct. 2019.
                                                                                                                               30



[23] D. J. Love, R. W. Heath, V. K. N. Lau, D. Gesbert, B. D. Rao, and M. Andrews, “An overview of limited feedback in
     wireless communication systems,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 1341–1365, Oct. 2008.
[24] C. A. Metzler, A. Maleki, and R. G. Baraniuk, “From denoising to compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62,
     no. 9, pp. 5117–5144, Sept. 2016.
[25] P.-H. Kuo, H. T. Kung, and P.-A. Ting, “Compressive sensing based channel feedback protocols for spatially-correlated
     massive antenna arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), 2012, pp. 492–497.
[26] M. B. Mashhadi, Q. Yang, and D. Gündüz, “Distributed deep convolutional compression for massive MIMO CSI feedback,”
     IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2621–2633, Apr. 2021.
[27] C.-K. Wen, W.-T. Shih, and S. Jin, “Deep learning for massive MIMO CSI feedback,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 5,
     pp. 748–751, Oct. 2018.
[28] S. Ji and M. Li, “CLNet: Complex input lightweight neural network designed for massive MIMO CSI feedback,” IEEE
     Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10, Apr. 2021.
[29] J. Guo, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Convolutional neural network-based multiple-rate compressive sensing for massive
     MIMO CSI feedback: Design, simulation, and analysis,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2827–2840,
     Apr. 2020.
[30] J. Wang, G. Gui, T. Ohtsuki, B. Adebisi, H. Gacanin, and H. Sari, “Compressive sampled CSI feedback method based on
     deep learning for FDD massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 5873–5885, Aug. 2021.
[31] A. Romero, N. Ballas, S. E. Kahou, A. Chassang, C. Gatta, and Y. Bengio, “Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv: 1412.6550, 2014.
[32] J. Choi, “A distribution-free analysis of outage probability over block fading channels,” in Eur. Conf. Netw. and Commun.
     (EuCNC), Ljubljana, Slovenia, Jun. 2018.
[33] Y. Zhong, F. Alajaji, and L. L. Campbell, “Joint source–channel coding excess distortion exponent for some memoryless
     continuous-alphabet systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1296–1319, Mar. 2009.
[34] L. Peng and A. Guillén i Fàbregas, “Distortion outage probability in MIMO block-fading channels,” in IEEE Int. Symp.
     Inf. Theory (ISIT), Austin, Texas, U.S.A., Jun. 2010, pp. 2223–2227.
[35] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “CBAM: Convolutional block attention module,” in Proc. of Eur. Conf. on
     Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Munich, Germany, Sep. 2018, pp. 3–19.
[36] X. Li, J. Fang, H. Li, and P. Wang, “Millimeter wave channel estimation via exploiting joint sparse and low-rank structures,”
     IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1123–1133, Apr. 2018.
[37] H. Yu and S. Winkler, “Image complexity and spatial information,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Qual. Multimedia Exper.
     (QoMEX), Klagenfurt am Wörthersee, Austria, Jul. 2013, pp. 12–17.
[38] Y. Liu, K. Chen, C. Liu, Z. Qin, Z. Luo, and J. Wang, “Structured knowledge distillation for semantic segmentation,” in
     Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Long Beach, USA, Jun. 2019, pp. 2599–2608.
[39] G. Chen, W. Choi, X. Yu, T. Han, and M. Chandraker, “Learning efficient object detection models with knowledge
     distillation,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 30, Long Beach, USA, Dec. 2017.
[40] J. H. Cho and B. Hariharan, “On the efficacy of knowledge distillation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
     Seoul, Korea (South), Oct. 2019, pp. 4793–4801.
[41] S. S. Ioushua and Y. C. Eldar, “A family of hybrid analog–digital beamforming methods for massive MIMO systems,”
     IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 3243–3257, Jan. 2019.
