IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 14, 15 JULY 2025

28259

Semantic-Oriented Modulation for
Wireless Communication
Yangfan Wang , Xuefei Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yao Sun , Senior Member, IEEE,
Qimei Cui , Senior Member, IEEE, and Xiaofeng Tao , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In semantic communication (SemCom), the gain of
deep learning (DL)-based joint source and channel coding (JSCC)
has been proved to partly come from the analog transmission
of semantic features extracted directly from the source signal.
While the current mainstream digital communication system
design results in the gains almost vanishing when bit-oriented
modulation (e.g., QPSK) is employed. To tackle this problem,
we propose a semantic-oriented modulation (SOM) method that
enables direct mapping from an analog value of a semantic
feature to a sequence of discrete values without bit conversion.
SOM employs a hierarchical design to mitigate discretization
loss and optimizes resource allocation by exploiting the varying
significance of semantic features, reducing the data volume by
29.17%. We provide an analysis that reveals the impact of modulation orders and hierarchical layers, guiding the SOM’s design.
Simulations in four tasks show that SOM outperforms JSCC with
bit-oriented modulation, and the implementation of the softwaredefined radio (SDR) platform confirms its compatibility with
existing systems and its potential for latency reduction.
Index
Terms—Hierarchical
modulation,
communication (SemCom), semantic error.

semantic

I. I NTRODUCTION
EMANTIC communication (SemCom) is a new paradigm
that exploits deep learning (DL) models to enable endto-end communications by only transmitting the meaning of
the messages rather than the whole raw data [1]. This enables
the transceiver to identify the most valuable information,
namely, the information required to reconstruct the meaning

S

Received 12 February 2025; revised 22 April 2025; accepted 24 April
2025. Date of publication 29 April 2025; date of current version 9 July 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2902900, and in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62271073.
(Corresponding author: Xuefei Zhang.)
Yangfan Wang and Xuefei Zhang are with the School of
Information and Communication Engineering, Beijing University
of
Posts
and
Telecommunications,
Beijing
100876,
China
(e-mail: wangyangfan@bupt.edu.cn; zhangxuefei@bupt.edu.cn).
Yao Sun is with the James Watt School of Engineering, The University of
Glasgow, G12 8QQ Glasgow, U.K. (e-mail: yao.sun@glasgow.ac.uk).
Qimei Cui is with the Department of Information and Communication
Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China, and also with the Department of Broadband Communication,
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: cuiqimei@
bupt.edu.cn).
Xiaofeng Tao is with the National Engineering Research Center of Mobile
Network Technologies, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing 100876, China, and also with the Department of Broadband
Communication, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail:
taoxf@bupt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3565017

intended by the transmitter [2], [3]. It is a promising way to
achieve robust transmission performance with less bandwidth
consumption.
Nowadays, most studies on SemCom pay great effort to
semantic extraction or joint source channel coding (JSCC).
Literature [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15] provides some promising DL models to tackle
the various tasks, respectively. For example, a convolutional
neural network (CNN) is exploited in image transmission [4],
and a recurrent neural network (RNN) performs well in
audio and text transmission [16], [17]. Recently, some new
emerging DL models, e.g., transformer, autoencoder, and
generative adversarial network (GAN), have shown their
strength on various tasks. Even generative AI has been
extensively exploited [18], [19]. More inspiringly, some studies have shown that DL-based SemCom can achieve better
noise resiliency compared with the traditional communication
schemes in the low signal-to-noise (SNR) regime [4].
JSCC can output features via DL, but these often diverge
from traditional constellations and are incompatible with
existing systems. To ensure compatibility, traditional modulation methods first quantize semantic features into discrete
bits (e.g., 8-bit or 16-bit representations) and then map bits
to standardized symbols [20], but at the cost of semantic
deviation introduced by quantization. However, based on
extensive studies, a recognized result about the gain of DLbased SemCom is mainly from the analog transmission of
semantic features directly from the source signal. The gains
almost vanish when the coded symbols are limited to the bitoriented modulation [21], [22], e.g., QPSK, 16QAM, etc. The
reason is that the bit error may happen in some significant bits,
leading to a big value discrepancy [23]. Fig. 1 takes a 16-bit
floating-point representation of 1.2 as an example. A single-bit
error in the sign bit, e.g., a single “0” is turned into a “1,” gives
rise to the wrong value of −1.2 (i.e., around −1 times); while
a single-bit error in the first exponent bit, e.g., a single “0”
is turned into “1,” results in the wrong value of 90 112 (i.e.,
around 75 093 times); while a single-bit error in last fraction
bit, e.g., a single “0” is turned into a “1,” brings the wrong
value of 1.35 (i.e., around 1.14 times). It is obvious that errors
in the sign, exponent, and fraction bit result in different levels
of value discrepancies that possibly reach up to several orders
of magnitude.
On the contrary, the big discrepancy is almost absent in the
analog transmission [23]. For example, the resulting deviation
is typically bounded between −1.5 and 3.5 times the original

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
2327-4662 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

28260

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 14, 15 JULY 2025

4) The simulation results demonstrate the benefits of
SOM in four different tasks (e.g., image transmission,
audio classification, text transmission, and image classification), compared with the JSCC with bit-oriented
modulation. In addition, another byproduct of SOM is
latency reduction, validated by the experimental results.
II. R ELATED W ORK

Fig. 1. Two deviations are caused by the digital and analog transmission of
semantic feature.

value when the output feature is normalized and the noises
follow a Gaussian distribution N (0, 1) [24]. This discrepancy
is far less than the error that possibly happens in the exponent
bit. The reason is that the noises or interferences are directly
added to the analog value, leading to the discrepancy in a
limited range. Despite the benefits of analog transmission of
semantic features, it is incompatible with the current digital
communication system. Thus, how to transmit the analog value
of the semantic features in the current digital communication
system is a matter of concern.
Motivated by the above observations and the need to
preserve semantic fidelity in SemCom systems, this article
proposes a semantic-oriented modulation (SOM) method to
leverage the gains of transmitting the analog value of the
semantic features. The contribution of this article can be
summarized as follows.
1) The SOM method directly maps the analog value of the
semantic features to the discrete points in the constellation by adopting a multilayer local amplification. Unlike
traditional modulation, which first quantizes semantic
features into discrete bits (e.g., 8-bit or 16-bit representations) and then maps bits to symbols, SOM bypasses
the explicit quantization step. In this way, the proposed
modulation preserves the gains achieved by transmitting
the analog value of the semantic features in SemCom,
while employing a discrete modulation scheme to remain
compatible with current digital communication systems.
2) A key lies in the resource allocation mechanism: by
prioritizing significant features (e.g., those with higher
impact on the model) and allocating fewer resources to
less significant ones, this method ensures that critical
features occupy higher resolution regions of the constellation. By this way, SOM can achieve a tradeoff,
further reducing the volume of data to be transmitted
while enhancing task-specific performance.
3) An analytical result on semantic error, involving the
feature quantization error and decision error, in SOM is
provided. It unveils the relationship between the number
of layers and orders and the semantic transmission
performance. On this basis, the number of layers and
order for the feature transmission rely on their relative
semantic significance, thereby guiding the design of
SOM specifically for SemCom.

SemCom has been proven a promising technology in
low bandwidth or low SNR [20], [25]. Inspired by the
gains brought by SemCom, it has been extended to various data modalities, such as texts [5], [6], [7], speech
signals [8], [9], [10], images [4], [11], [12], videos [13], [14],
and multimodal data [15]. For example, Xie et al. [5]
proposed a transformer-based JSCC framework to achieve
improvements in text semantic similarity scores under low
SNR conditions. Weng and Qin [8] introduced an attentionbased JSCC system that extracts the most fundamental
speech semantic features to balance the accuracy of signal
reconstruction and the transmitted data volume. Similarly,
Gu et al. [15] proposed an attention-based SemCom system
for multimodal data transmission, which leverages the shared
semantic information to represent the semantic correlation
between the data in different modalities. In this way, the
data volume is further reduced while ensuring high-quality
reconstruction. Recent studies have explored the integration
of generative AI into SemCom to enhance content generation and communication efficiency [18], [19]. Recent studies
have explored advanced modulation techniques to improve
communication performance and compatibility with existing
digital communication systems, which is in line with the
SemCom goals of achieving reliable and efficient transmission [26], [27].
One recognized opinion about the cause of gains in
SemCom is the analog transmission for the semantic features extracted by the deep joint source channel coding
(DeepJSCC) [4]. While the gains almost vanish when the
coded symbols are limited to the bit-oriented modulation, e.g.,
QPSK, 16-QAM, etc. The reason is that the bit error may
happen in some significant bits that leads to big semantic
discrepancies. Some analog transmission studies have shown
their potential on low SNR regime, if adding the channel
noises directly to the analog value of the semantic features
values [12], [21], [28]. As such, the cliff effect that causes
decoding failure in binary digital communication systems does
not appear. In contrast, the gains in binary coded feature values
are lost, especially in strong noisy channels [29], [30], [31],
[32]. On this basis, [22] explores the degree-of-freedom limit
of a discrete transmission. The result is that the performance
loss is almost missing if the degree of freedom reaches 4096,
i.e., 4096-QAM.
We propose the SOM to mitigate the performance loss
caused by feature discretization and be compatible with existing communication systems. This training-free and rule-based
method directly maps the analog value of the semantic features
to discrete symbol sequences (instead of a bit sequence).
Below, we provide the comparisons between SOM and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: SEMANTIC-ORIENTED MODULATION FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION

28261

A. Transmitter

Fig. 2.

Wireless SemCom system with SOM.

existing modulation methods in SemComs (e.g., bit-oriented
modulation, DNN-based modulation, etc.).
1) Comparison With Bit-Oriented Modulation: Bit-oriented
modulation is widely adopted in the current digital
communication systems [6], [7], [23]. The goal of the
bit-oriented modulation is to transform every M-bit
sequence into a symbol, where the bit sequences are
the results of the binary quantization on the semantic
features. Unfortunately, the quantization errors in the
semantic features appear. That leads to a consequence
that the gains from the DNN-based semantic representation almost vanish when the coded symbols are
limited to the bit-oriented modulation [21]. Compared
with the bit-oriented modulation, our proposed SOM is
to transform an analog value of a semantic feature into
L symbols, which increases the degree of freedom of
modulation to compensate for the gain loss caused by
binary quantization.
2) Comparison With DNN-Based Modulation: DNN-based
modulation is the most common modulation method
in SemCom. The goal of DNN-based modulation is
to directly map the semantic features extracted from
the DNNs into the symbols, relying on the end-toend joint training [22], [29], [33], [34], [35], [36]. A
defect of end-to-end joint training, especially involving
the time-varying channels and random noises, is the
high training cost. In addition, modulation is commonly
integrated with source or channel coding as a whole
in [35] and [36], to further improve the performance.
In this way, the transmission module (e.g., channel
coding and modulation) cannot be separated from the
source coding module, which is incompatible with
the current digital communication system. Compared
with the DNN-based modulation, our proposed SOM
is separated from the source coding (i.e., semantic
representation), which is friendly to the current digital
communication system. Moreover, simulation results in
Section V-B confirm that our proposed SOM achieves
better task performance compared with the DNN-based
joint modulation-coding methods.

III. S YSTEM M ODEL
The wireless SemCom system aims to efficiently transmit
and recover critical semantic features for various tasks. In this
section, we describe the system model of SOM for wireless
SemCom, as illustrated in Fig. 2.

As shown in Fig. 2, the transmitter consists of two parts:
the semantic encoder and the semantic-oriented modulator.
The semantic encoder is implemented using an independent
deep neural network (DNN). The input source data, D, is
transformed into the features, f = [f1 , f2 , . . . , fN ] ∈ RN , by
the semantic encoder, where fn denotes the nth feature and
n ∈ [1, 2, . . . , N]. The extracted features f are expressed as


f = gTc D; φ T
(1)
where gTc (·) denotes the semantic encoder with the parameters φ T . In order to normalize the features, the output layer
of the DNN in the semantic encoder commonly adopts a
batch normalization (BN) layer [37], thereby resulting in the
output with the mean of zero and the variance of one, i.e.,
a standard Gaussian distribution. According to the empirical
rule, known as the 3σ rule, nearly 99.7% falls within three
standard deviations [24]. Thus, 99.73% of the data in a
standard Gaussian distribution lies within the range [−3, 3],
i.e., most extracted features are clipped to this range [32].
The semantic-oriented modulator consists of two mappers,
i.e., complex number mapper and multilayer I/Q mapper.
The goal of the complex number mapper is transforming the
N-element feature vector f to (N/2)-element complex number
vector s = [s1 , s2 , . . . , s(N/2) ] ∈ C(N/2) . As such, the mapping
is given by


N
(2)
si = f2i−1 + j · f2i , i ∈ 1, 2, . . . ,
2
where j denotes the imaginary unit (j2 = −1).
In the multilayer I/Q mapper, the modulated symbols x are
given by
x = gTm (s; L, M)

(3)

where gTm (·) denotes the multilayer I/Q mapper with parameters L and M, L is the number of modulation layers and
M is the modulation order of each layer. Here, we adopt
M-QAM as the modulation pattern in each layer. Specifically,
the (N/2)-element complex number vector s is modulated to
(NL/2) symbols in the L-layer constellation, respectively, i.e.,
L modulated symbols [xi,1 , xi,2 , . . . , xi,L ] are from si for i ∈
[1, 2, . . . , (N/2)].
B. Wireless Channel
The whole transceiver in Fig. 2 is designed for a single communication link, in which the wireless channel, represented
by ph (y | x), produces the output as received symbols y.
Denote the coefficients of a linear channel as h, and then
the transmission from the transmitter to the receiver can be
modeled as
y=h∗x+n

(4)

where n ∼ CN (0, σ 2 ) indicates independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) additive white Gaussian noise, σ 2 is noise
variance for channel.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

28262

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 14, 15 JULY 2025

Then, we use minimum Euclidean distance (MED) estimation for deciding, given by
x̂ = arg miny − c2
c∈C

(5)

where y − c2 denotes the Euclidean distance between the
received symbols y and the candidate symbol c. Here, C
denotes the set of constellation symbols in an M-QAM.
C. Receiver
The receiver also consists of two parts: 1) the semanticoriented demodulator and 2) the semantic decoder.
Specifically, the semantic-oriented demodulator consists
of two de-mappers, i.e., multilayer I/Q de-mapper and
complex number de-mapper. In the multilayer I/Q de-mapper,
the (NL/2)-element symbol vector x̂ are demodulated to
(N/2)-element quantization complex number vector ŝ =
[ŝ1 , ŝ2 , . . . , ŝ(N/2) ] ∈ C(N/2) , given by


(6)
ŝ = gRm x̂; L, M
where gRm (·) denotes the multilayer demodulator with parameters L and M.
The goal of the complex number de-mapper is transforming
the received (N/2)-element complex number vector ŝ to the Nelement feature vector f̂ = [f̂1 , f̂2 , . . . , f̂N ] ∈ RN . Specifically,
the features f̂2i−1 and f̂2i are obtained from the complex value
ŝi are expressed as follows:
 
 
(7)
f̂2i−1 =  ŝi , f̂2i =  ŝi
where (·) and (·) denote the real and imaginary parts,
respectively.
Then, the recovered feature vector f̂ are decoded into the
source data, D̂, by the semantic decoder, expressed as


D̂ = gRc f̂ ; φ R
(8)
where gRc (·) denotes the semantic decoder with the parameters φ R .
D. Performance Metrics
In order to evaluate the semantic transmission performance,
we use cosine similarity (CosSim), Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL divergence), and Earth mover’s distance (EMD)
as the performance metrics, i.e., measuring the semantic
transmission performance between the extracted feature vector
f at the transmitter and the recovered feature vector f̂ at the
receiver. The CosSim is given by [38], [39]
CosSim =

f · f̂
f f̂ 

(9)

where (·) denotes the inner product of two vectors. Note that
the value of CosSim is within the range [−1, 1], where the
value closer to 1 indicates a higher similarity between the
extracted feature vector f and the recovered feature vector f̂ .
KL divergence is a measure of the difference between
two probability distributions. In feature transmission, the KL
divergence can be used to measure the difference between
the distribution of the recovered feature vector and that of

the extracted feature vector, thereby assessing the transmission
quality. Specifically, if we treat the extracted feature distribution as P and the recovered feature distribution as Q, then
a smaller DKL (P||Q) indicates that the two distributions are
more similar, meaning less information is lost during recovery. Conversely, a larger KL divergence suggests significant
distributional discrepancies and greater information loss. The
KL divergence, denoted as DKL (P||Q), reflects the degree of
inconsistency between the two distributions, which is defined
as [40]
DKL (P||Q) =



P(i) log

i

P(i)
Q(i)

(10)

where P and Q are normalized probability distributions of
the extracted and recovered features, respectively, with Pi =
xi / j xj and Qi = yi / j yj .
The EMD is a distance measure between two sets of distributions. To measure the distributional discrepancy between
the recovered feature vector and the extracted feature vector,
the 1-D EMD is defined as [41]
EMD(P||Q) =

i

i

j=1

P(j) −

i


Q(j)) .

(11)

j=1

IV. S EMANTIC -O RIENTED M ODULATION : F ROM
S EMANTIC F EATURE VALUES TO M ODULATED S YMBOLS
The primary goal of modulation is to embed the information
into the carrier signals in a way that allows it to be efficiently
transmitted over a communication channel. Meanwhile, it
ought to be resistant to noises, interferences, and deviations
to enhance transmission reliability. In digital modulation, the
information signal is discrete and represented in the form
of binary digits (bits). The carrier signal is manipulated to
represent these bits, allowing for the transmission of digital
data. Despite the SOM rather than the bit-oriented modulation,
the information must be represented in a discrete form to be
compatible with the current digital system. Our proposed SOM
is separated from the source coding (i.e., semantic representation), which is friendly to the current digital communication
system. A benefit of separation is that it supports separate
optimization and evaluation of transmission performance (e.g.,
CosSim) and task performance (e.g., PSNR, SSIM, accuracy,
and BLEU). This makes it practical for real-world scenarios
where semantic extraction models and baseband processing
modules (i.e., the transmission module) may be updated or
replaced independently. In the simulations in Section V,
we demonstrate the applicability of SOM in four different
semantic models.
SOM aims to directly map a pair of semantic feature into a
point that is represented by the high-precision discrete-value
in the constellation. The point is the nearest modulate point
in the constellation to the position whose coordinates are the
two analog values of the semantic feature values. Despite
keeping the gains through the high-precision representation of
the transmitted semantic information, it meanwhile leads to
a transmission reliability decrease. As such, the challenge is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: SEMANTIC-ORIENTED MODULATION FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION

28263

the distance between si and the accumulative quantization
value, is given by
xi,l = arg min

cl,m ∈CM,l

(a)

(b)
Fig. 3. Illustration of a 3-layer, √
4-order SOM. (a) Local amplification way
(the amplification coefficient is M = 2). (b) Mapping from a complex
number si to the modulated symbols [x̂i,1 , x̂i,2 , x̂i,3 ].

how to guarantee the transmission reliability under the highprecision representation of the modulated point.
The proposed SOM depends on an L-layer M-order constellation, where L = 3 and M = 4 in Fig. 3. Each
layer constellation is partitioned into M regions, where the
modulated points are in the center of each region. To support
a high-precision representation of the transmitted symbol, the
modulation follows a local amplification rule, i.e., the (l +
1)th layer constellation is a local amplification region of
the selected subregion in the lth layer. The physical region
area of each layer is the same, thereby resulting in the
same distance between the neighboring points in the arbitrary
layer. The√amplification coefficient between the neighboring
layers is M, as is shown in Fig. 3(a). In this way, we
achieve the same transmission reliability under the highprecision representation of the modulated point but at the
cost of L times the symbols to be transmitted. The symbols
generated by the SOM are QAM constellation symbols, which
can be modulated onto subcarriers via orthogonal frequencydivision multiplexing (OFDM) and transmitted through the RF,
ensuring compatibility with existing wireless standards. In the
following, we give a detailed description of multilayer I/Q
mapping and de-mapping.
A. Multilayer IQ Mapping and De-Mapping
In the modulation, L modulated symbols [xi,1 , xi,2 , . . . , xi,L ]
to represent the complex number si are generated through a
L-layer mapping process. Up to the lth layer, the residual
between si and the accumulative quantization value is calcu√ k−1
l−1
(xi,k / M ), where the kth layer
lated by the term si − k=1
√ k−1
coefficient (1/ M ) is used to diminish the residual caused
by the local amplification between the layers. As such, the
modulated symbol in the lth layer, depending on minimizing

si −

l−1


√ l−1
xi,k
(12)
√ k−1 − cl,m × M
M
k=1

where cl,m denotes the mth constellation symbol in CM,l . Here,
CM,l denotes the set of constellation symbols in the lth layer,
which √
is scaled from the symbols in the (l−1)th layer by factor
M). Specifically, CM,l is defined as CM,l = {cl,m =
of (1/ √
(cl−1,m / M) | cl−1,m ∈ CM,l−1 , m = 1, 2, . . . , M}, where
CM,1 is the initial set of constellation symbols.
At the multilayer I/Q de-mapper, the de-mapping process
reconstructs the received complex number ŝi by the received
symbols [xi,1 , xi,2 , . . . , xi,L ]. The recovered complex number
ŝi is given by
ŝi =

L

l=1

√

x̂i,l
M

l−1

, l ∈ [1, 2, . . . , L].

(13)

Finally, the recovered feature f̂2i and f̂2i+1 for i =
1, 2, . . . , (N/2) are given by (7), thereby yielding f̂ =
[f̂1 , f̂2 , . . . , f̂N ] as the received feature vector.
Now, we transmit the features f2i = 1.876 and f2i+1 =
1.124 as an example. The exemplified modulation process can
be generalized to other configurations with different numbers
of layers and modulation orders. First, the two features are
represented by a complex number si = 1.876+j·1.124, whose
position in the constellation plane is (1.876, 1.124), where
the constellation plane is bounded by the range of [−3, 3]
as mentioned in Section III-A. Fig. 3(b) illustrates how to
modulate si = 1.876 + j · 1.124 into three symbols through the
3-layer 4-order SOM. A detailed description of the modulation
is provided in the following.
1) First Layer: There are M = 4 possible symbols divide the plane into four equal regions, and
we refer to CM,1 as the constellation in the first
layer, denoted by CM,1 = {c1,1 , c1,2 , c1,3 , c1,4 } =
{(1.5, 1.5), (1.5, −1.5), (−1.5, −1.5), (−1.5, 1.5)}. The
nearest constellation symbol to si = (1.876, 1.145) is
c1,1 = (1.5, 1.5), so the symbol xi,1 = c1,1 = (1.5, 1.5).
The residual of si in the first layer is calculated as:
si −xi,1 = (1.876, 1.124)−(1.5, 1.5) = (0.376, −0.374).
The subregion centered at c1,1 is then amplified by a
factor of M = 4 in the next layer, doubling the range in
each dimension to refine the representation.
2) Second Layer: In the second layer, there are M = 4 possible symbols equally subdivide the region selected in
the previous layer into four subregions, and the constellation CM,2 is denoted as C2 = {c2,1 , c2,2 , c2,3 , c2,4 } =
{(0.75, 0.75), (0.75, −0.75), (−0.75, −0.75), (−0.75,
0.75)}. The nearest constellation symbol to the
residual (0.376, −0.374) from the first layer
√ is c2,4 =
Mc2,4 =
(−0.75, −0.75), so the symbol xi,2 =
(1.5, −1.5). The amplification ensures that the physical
distance
√ between neighboring symbols is scaled by the
factor M = 2, increasing from 1.5 to 3. In this way, the
physical distance in the second layer is the same as that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

28264

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 14, 15 JULY 2025

in the first layer. This local amplification way ensures
the same interference-resistance capability with the first
layer, meanwhile, to improve the quantization accuracy.
The updated residual is calculated as: si −xi,1 −(xi,2 /2) =
(0.376, −0.374) − [(1.5, −1.5)/2] = (−0.374, 0.376),
which will be mapped to the next layer. The region
centered at c2,4 is then amplified by a coefficient of
M = 4 in the next layer, similarly doubling the range.
3) Third Layer: In the third layer, there are M = 4 possible
symbols equally subdivide the region selected in the
previous layer into four subregions, and the constellation
CM,3 is denoted as C3 = {c3,1 , c3,2 , c3,3 , c3,4 } =
{(0.375, 0.375), (0.375, −0.375), (−0.375, −0.375),
(−0.375, 0.375)}. The nearest constellation symbols to
the residual (−0.374, 0.376) is c3,2 = (−0.375, 0.375),
√ 2
so the symbol xi,3 = M c3,2 = (−1.5, 1.5). Similarly,
it amplifies the physical distance between neighboring
√ 2
symbols from 0.75 to 3 by the factor M = 4,
preserving the same interference-resistance capability
with the previous layers, but with higher quantization
accuracy.
Thus, the complex number si = (1.876, 1.124) is
modulated as three symbols, i.e., [xi,1 , xi,2 , xi,3 ]
=
[(1.5, 1.5), (1.5, −1.5), (−1.5, 1.5)]. At the receiver, the
received symbols polluted by the noises are expressed as
x̂i,1 , x̂i,2 , x̂i,3 = [(1.5, 1.5), (1.5, −1.5), (−1.5, 1.5)]
+ [(0.1, −0.05), (−0.15, −0.1), (−0.05, 0.1)]
= [(1.6, 1.45), (1.35, −1.6), (−1.55, 1.6)]

(14)

where [(0.1, −0.05), (−0.15, −0.1), (−0.05, 0.1)] denotes an
example of noise amplitude values. Then, the received complex number ŝi is recovered as
ŝi =

3

x̂i,l
l=1

2l−1

(1.35, −1.6) (−1.55, 1.6)
+
2
4
= (1.8875, 1.05).

= (1.6, 1.45) +

(15)

Then, the features are obtained as f̂2i = (ŝi ) = 1.8875 and
f̂2i+1 = (ŝi ) = 1.05. The error between the transmitted and
recovered features is calculated as 1.876 − 1.8875 = −0.0115
and 1.124 − 1.05 = 0.074, respectively.

1) Quantization Errors: The quantization error arises from
the error introduced when mapping analog values of semantic
features to L symbols. For a given L and M, the quantization
√ L
range [−3, 3] is divided into M uniform intervals, as shown
in Fig. 4. Any analog value in the kth interval is represented
by the quantization value vk , where vk is the midpoint of
√ L
the kth interval,
i.e.,
v
=
−3
+
([6k
−
3]/
M ) for k ∈
k
√ L
{1, 2, . . . , M }.
The quantization error arises during the mapping process at
the transmitter, as the analog values of the semantic features
are approximated by discrete values. For a given fn , the
mapping result vk is the midpoint of the kth interval. The
quantization error n of the nth feature is the gap between the
analog value of the semantic feature value fn and the discrete
mapping result vk , i.e.,

√ L
n = fn − vk , k ∈ 1, 2, . . . , M .
(17)
As given in Section III-A, the features fn approximately
follow a standard Gaussian distribution, where the probability
density function (PDF) of fn is given by
 2
1
f
(18)
Pf (fn ) = √ exp − n .
2
2π
Critically, the same n can occur in any interval where fn
deviates from vk by n . For example, n = 0.1 may result
from n = 0.1 lying at vk + 0.1 in the first interval or v2 + 0.1
in the second interval. The PDF of n , denoted P (n ), is
obtained by summing the Gaussian probability densities of
all fn values that generate the same n in their respective
intervals, is given by
√

P (n ) =

=

B. Semantic Errors in L-Layer M-Order SOM
To measure the performance of SOM, we define a concept—
semantic error—to describe the discrepancy between the
extracted semantic feature fn and the recovered counterparts f̂n
at the receiver. The semantic error of the nth feature is denoted
by εn and is calculated as
εn = fn − f̂n .

Fig. 4. Illustration of the quantization over the range [−3, 3], divided into
√ L
M uniform intervals.

(16)

The semantic error originates from two primary sources:
quantization error and decision error. The following quantitative analysis evaluates these two kinds of errors individually
and assesses their impacts on the performance of the proposed
method.

L

M


k=1
√ L
M


Pf (fn )

∂n + vk
∂n

Pf (n + vk )

k=1

√ L


M
1 
(n + vk )2
= √
exp −
2
2π k=1
⎛ 
2 ⎞
√

L
n + 6k−3
√ L
M
⎜
1 
M
⎜
= √
exp ⎜−
⎝
2
2π k=1

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(19)

√ L
√ L
for n ∈ [−(3/ M ), (3/ M )].
Based on (19), we can find that the quantization error is
negatively correlated with L and M. That means higher L and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: SEMANTIC-ORIENTED MODULATION FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION

Fig. 5.

PDFs of the quantization error n with different L and M.

28265

maps them to only two discrete values at ±1.5. This mismatch
between the feature distribution and the coarse quantization
forces the errors to aggregate at the extremes, resulting in a
bimodal PDF. The distinct bimodal issue can be resolved by
increasing either L or M. Combined with Fig. 6 that shows
the relationship between CosSim and L and M, we can see
the quantization error reduction and CosSim promotion with
larger M under low L while the slight impact of M under
high L condition. The reason is that the quantization error
√ L
√ L
range [−(3/ M ), (3/ M )] decreases exponentially with
increasing L. Consequently, the error is sufficiently low for
larger L, thereby diminishing in the impact of M on CosSim.
2) Decision Error: Decision errors in demodulation (due to
noise-corrupted signals) result in incorrect symbol detection,
which in turn leads to deviating semantic features. The decision error of the nth feature, denoted as δn of n ∈ [1, 2, . . . , N],
is given by
δn =

L


δn,l

(20)

l=1

where δn,l denotes the decision error of the nth feature in the
lth layer



⎧ 
 x n ,l − x̂ n ,l
⎪
⎪
2
2
⎨
, n ≡ 1 (mod 2)
√ l−1
M 


δn,l =
(21)
 x n ,l − x̂ n ,l
⎪
⎪
2
2
⎩
, n ≡ 0 (mod 2).
√ l−1
M

Fig. 6.

Performance comparison of CosSim for different L and M.

M bring lower quantization errors. Fig. 5 shows that the PDFs
of the quantization error f (n ) exhibit a progressively sharper
peak centered at zero as L and M increase. This concentration
of PDF near zero implies that the majority of quantization
errors diminish in magnitude, reflecting enhanced quantization
precision. An exception happens in L = 1 and M = 4
where the quantization error distribution exhibits a distinct
bimodal peak at n = ±1.5, deviating from the unimodal peak
observed in others. The reason is that the majority of feature
values are concentrated near zero, yet the quantization process

For square QAM constellations, M-QAM is written as the
Cartesian
product of pulse√amplitude modulation M − QAM =
√
( M − PAM)2 [42]. The M-level amplitudes are modulated
independently
which
√ can take the√amplitude values
√ of either
√
−( M − 1)d, −( M − 3)d, . . . , ( M − 3)d, and ( M − 1)d.
The value el,k denotes the possible deviation of amplitude
in either the I or Q channel in the lth layer, which can
√
√ l−1
take discrete
√ values of ([2(kl − M)d]/ M ), where kl =
1, 2, . . . , 2 M − 1. Here, d is the half minimum distance of
the neighboring symbol, which can be computed as follows:

3Es
(22)
d=
2(M − 1)

√ l−1

√ l−1


P δn,l = el,k = P M · el,k − d < n < M · el,k + d
⎞
⎛√
⎞⎤
⎡
⎛√
l−1
l−1
M
·
e
−
d
M
·
e
+
d
1⎣
l,k
l,k
⎠ − erfc⎝
⎠⎦
!
!
=
erfc⎝
2
N0
N0
2
2
 ⎞
 ⎞⎤
⎛
⎡
⎛
√
√
2k
−
2
M
−
1
d
−
2
M
+
1
d
2k
l
l
1
⎠ − erfc⎝
⎠⎦
!
!
= ⎣erfc⎝
2
N0
N0
2
2




%
$





√
√
1
3 Es
3 Es
=
− erfc 2kl − 2 M + 1
erfc 2kl − 2 M − 1
2
M − 1 N0
M − 1 N0


%
$

&
&




√
√
3
3
1
SNR − erfc 2kl − 2 M + 1
SNR .
=
erfc 2kl − 2 M − 1
2
M−1
M−1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(23)

28266

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 14, 15 JULY 2025

Fig. 8.
Fig. 7.

Performance comparison of CosSim for different SNR.

PMFs of the decision error δn with different M and SNR.

where Es denotes the symbol energy. In the presence of noise,
the received amplitude value deviates from its original value
due to the noise, which is zero-mean AWGN with a two-sided
power spectral density of (N0 /2).
The probability P(δn,l = el,k ) is the probability distribution
of the error δn,l in the lth layer, which is given by (23),
shown at the bottom of the previous page, where erfc(·) is
the complementary
' ∞error2 function traditionally defined by [43]
erfc(x) = (2/π ) x e−u du.
To obtain the probability mass function (PMF) of δn , we
assume that the errors δn,l in each layer are statistically
independent. Based on this, we express the probability that
the decision error δn takes a specific value e as the product
of individual probabilities from each layer, which is defined
as P(δn = e). Considering overall possible combinations of
{e1,k , e2,k , . . . , eL,k } that satisfy the condition e = Ll=1 el,k ,
the P(δn = e) is given by


P(δn = e) =
e=

L
(


P δn,l = el,k .

(24)

L
l=1
l=1 el,k

The decision error is the sum of the decision errors in all L
layers, where the decision error in each layer is independent.
So the decision error increases with the growth of L. Fig. 7
shows that the PMFs of the decision error P(δn = e) become
flatter and more dispersed as M increases. In addition, the decision error in every layer is determined by the order M, similar
to the classic one-layer M-QAM. A higher M is less robust to
the poor transmission environment (e.g., noises, interference
in the wireless channel), resulting in higher decision error.
That means the decision error is more sensitive to noise with
a higher M, which is consistent with our intuition. As SNR
increases, the PMFs are more concentrated around zero with
a narrower spread, indicating fewer decision errors. As shown
in Fig. 8, we may find that M plays a more dominant role in
CosSim than L in the low SNR, indicating the consequence
that the decision error overwhelms the quantization error under
low SNR. Therefore, we may reduce M to alleviate noiseinduced decision errors and, in the meantime, increase L to
preserve the quantization precision at low SNR.
Both quantization errors and decision errors affect the
overall semantic error in SOM. This dual influence reveals

a nuanced interplay between the number of layers L, modulation order M, and SNR. Increasing L and M can reduce
the quantization errors by dividing the analog value range
of the semantic features into finer intervals, thereby improving the precision of feature representation. However, this
improvement is at the cost of higher sensitivity to noise, as
larger M makes the system more prone to decision errors
due to the reduced distance between neighboring constellation
symbols. Decision errors dominate semantic errors at low
SNR, making noise resilience a critical factor for maintaining
reliable semantic recovery under noisy conditions. Conversely,
quantization errors become the primary concern at high SNR,
as noise has a minimal impact on symbol detection. This
dual influence highlights the need for a balance between the
quantization error and decision error in designing SOM. This
tradeoff suggests that experimental simulations can prioritize
higher L for precision and lower M for noise resilience to
reduce semantic error.
V. S IMULATION R ESULTS
In this section, simulations are performed to evaluate the
proposed system. The details of the simulation settings are
introduced. Then, the proposed SOM is compared with other
baselines.
A. Implementation Details
1) Datasets and Training Settings: We choose four popular
datasets commonly adopted for evaluating performance in
four different tasks, including image transmission, text transmission, audio classification, and image classification. The
CIFAR-10 [44] dataset, adopted for the image transmission
task, consists of 60 000 32 × 32 color images, with 50 000
images used for training and 10 000 remaining for testing. The
MNIST [45] dataset, adopted for the image classification task,
consists of 70 000 28 × 28 grayscale images of handwritten
digits, with 60 000 images used for training and 10 000 for
testing. The European Parliament proceedings corpus [46],
adopted for the text transmission task, includes approximately
2.0 million sentences and 53 million words. After preprocessing, the sentence lengths are limited to 4–30 words, and the
dataset is split into a training set and a testing set. The speech
dataset [47] from Edinburgh DataShare, adopted for the audio

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: SEMANTIC-ORIENTED MODULATION FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION

28267

TABLE I
T RAINING PARAMETERS

classification task, comprises more than 10 000 .wav files for
the training set and 800 .wav files for the testing set, with a
sampling rate of 16 kHz.
The semantic encoder and decoder models adopted in this
work were implemented by the PyTorch DL framework.
These models are designed to support the four tasks. The
design of the models is inspired by prior works on SemCom,
including [5], [21], [48], and [49]. The detailed training
parameters for each task are summarized in Table I.
2) Benchmarks and Performance Metrics: To evaluate the
performance of the proposed method, we compare it with two
benchmark methods under an AWGN channel. In the image
transmission task, we also include joint coding–modulation
(JCM) methods as benchmarks for comparison. The methods
are described as follows.
1) JSCC With Direct Transmission (JSCC-DT) [4], [12]:
Semantic features are transmitted directly over the channel. The analog value of the semantic features extracted
from the DNNs is directly mapped to the symbol, relying
on the end-to-end joint training. This method is used to
investigate the impact of noise on semantic transmission
performance.
2) JSCC With Bit-Oriented Modulation (JSCC-BOM): The
analog value of semantic features is first quantified using
a fixed-bit quantizer into bits. The quantized bits are
then encoded using low-density parity check (LDPC)
codes for error correction and quadrature amplitude
modulation (QAM) for modulation. This method is used
to investigate the impact of discretization on semantic
transmission performance.
3) JCM [35]: The JCM framework adopts a variational
autoencoder to jointly optimize coding and modulation,
for the adaptive symbol generation in a data-driven and
channel-adaptive way. This method learns the transition
probability from source data to discrete constellation
symbols to generate the adaptive symbol, maximizing
the mutual information.

Here, the proposed SOM adopts an 8-layer, 4-order structure
(L = 8, M = 4). In this way, two features are represented as
the real and imaginary parts of a complex number, respectively.
Then, the complex number is transformed into eight symbols,
equivalent to four symbols to represent one feature. To ensure
the same quantization precision as SOM, the JSCC-BOM
method employs a 9-bit quantizer to represent the semantic
features into bits. The JSCC-BOM method employs a 9bit quantizer to transform the semantic features into bits.
The LDPC codes are configured with a coding rate of
4/7. 16-QAM is adopted in JSCC-BOM to ensure the same
channel utilization with SOM (resulting in four symbols to
represent one feature, same as SOM). Thus, two methods
allocate four symbols to represent one semantic feature,
ensuring identical transmission overhead and fair comparison in channel resource utilization. The comparison between
the proposed JSCC-DT, JSCC-BOM, and SOM focuses on
semantic transmission, not the model itself, as all methods
share identical semantic encoders and decoders, ensuring
a fair evaluation of semantic feature transmission over the
channel.
The performance is evaluated using task-specific metrics
in the four tasks, and CosSim, as defined in Section III-D,
is adopted to evaluate the performance of semantic feature
transmission. For the image reconstruction task, we adopt the
peak SNR ratio (PSNR) [4], [15] to measure reconstruction
quality. PSNR is defined as
⎛


PSNR D, D̂ = 10 · log10 ⎝

⎞
MAX2 ⎠

 dB
MSE D, D̂

(25)

where MSE represents the mean-squared error between the
source image D and the recovered image D̂, and the maximum
pixel value for 8-bit RGB images is denoted by MAX = 255.
Another image quality metric is the structural similarity index
(SSIM) [50], which assesses the perceived similarity between

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

28268

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 14, 15 JULY 2025

(b)

(a)

(d)

(c)

(e)

Fig. 9. Performance comparison in four different tasks. (a) PSNR (image transmission). (b) SSIM (image transmission). (c) ACC (image classification).
(d) BLEU (text transmission). (e) ACC (audio classification).

the source image bmD and the recovered image D̂. The SSIM
is defined as





2μD μD̂ + C1 2σDD̂ + C2

 (26)
SSIM D, D̂ = 
μ2D + μ2 + C1 σD2 + σ 2 + C2
D̂

D̂

where μD and μD̂ are the average values of the original and
recovered images, σD and σD̂ are their standard deviations,
σDD̂ is the covariance between the original and recovered
image, and C1 and C2 are constants to stabilize the division.
The bi-lingual evaluation understudy (BLEU) [46] score is
adopted for the text transmission task to evaluate the similarity
between the recovered sentence and the reference sentence.
BLEU measures the precision of word matches between the
two sentences. The BLEU is defined as



r
+ log p1
(27)
BLEU = exp min 0, 1 −
r̂
where r and r̂ denote the lengths of the source and recovered
sentences, respectively, and p1 represents the proportion of
matched words in the recovered sentence relative to the
reference. This metric provides a straightforward evaluation of
text reconstruction quality by focusing solely on word-level
similarity.
For both the audio classification and image classification
tasks, Accuracy (ACC) is adopted as the evaluation metric. It
measures the proportion of correctly classified samples relative
to the total number of samples in the test set.
B. Performance Analysis
Fig. 9(a) and (b) compares the task performance of SOM,
JSCC-DT, JSCC-BOM, and JCM for image transmission. The
results demonstrate that SOM provides a gradual degradation as the SNR decreases, which is similar to the trend
observed in JSCC-DT. Such behavior is akin to that of an
analog scheme [23], [28] and JSCC-DT [4], [12]. In contrast,
JSCC-BOM fails to reach the performance of JSCC-DT. The
performance gap between JSCC-BOM and SOM arises even in

the same quantization precision because JSCC-BOM is highly
sensitive to errors in some specific bits. This may lead to substantial numerical deviations in the recovered feature values.
JCM performs better than JSCC-BOM in a low SNR regime
due to the joint training between coding and modulation.
However, its performance is much lower than that of JSCC and
our proposed SOM. The reason is that the symbols extracted
from the DNN-based JCM are still limited to the low degree
of freedom of one-layer QAM, much lower than that of analog
symbols in JSCC and that of multilayer QAM in SOM. SOM
effectively mitigates this problem by mapping the discrete
features directly to the transmitted symbols. In this way, the
error range in each layer is constrained and the impact of errors
progressively diminishes across subsequent layers. Therefore,
SOM compensates for the gain loss caused by the discrete
transmission of features. Fig. 9(c)–(e) shows the performance
comparisons of the other three tasks (e.g., image classification,
text transmission, and audio classification). These results
exhibit a similar trend in image transmission tasks, i.e., SOM
showing a smooth degradation in task-specific metrics (e.g.,
ACC for classification and BLEU for text transmission) as
SNR decreases.
Although JSCC learns to denoise at the receiver through
end-to-end joint training, it cannot prevent semantic features
from being corrupted by channel noise during transmission.
The reason is that JSCC directly maps semantic features
to noise-sensitive symbols, e.g., [21], making these features
susceptible to noise interference during transmission. Our
proposed SOM method uses low-order symbols to represent
semantic features and can resist noise interference during
transmission. Compared with JSCC, the features input to the
semantic decoder by our proposed SOM have less deviation
during transmission. As shown in Fig. 10, it confirms that
SOM outperforms JSCC in semantic feature transmission
performance (e.g., CosSim, KL, and EMD). Naturally, as
shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), for the same semantic codec, better
semantic feature transmission performance indicates better

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: SEMANTIC-ORIENTED MODULATION FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION

28269

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 10. CosSim, KL divergence, and EMD comparison in four different tasks. (a) Image transmission. (b) Image classification. (c) Text transmission.
(d) Audio classification.

task performance. Another observation is that the performance
loss of JSCC mainly comes from the decision error due to
poor transmission, while the loss of SOM is caused by both
the decision error and quantization error. At SNR = 0 dB,
the decision errors in JSCC and SOM are both serious.
Additionally, SOM has the quantization error. Therefore, JSCC
performs better than SOM at SNR=0 dB. With increased
SNR, the gain from the high degree of freedom in multilayer
modulation in the proposed SOM compensates for the loss
caused by extra quantization errors. Thus, SOM achieves
comparable or even better performance than JSCC as SNR
increases, as shown in Fig. 9.
Fig. 10 shows the CosSim, KL divergence, and EMD comparison of SOM, JSCC-DT, and JSCC-BOM. SOM achieves
higher CosSim and lower KL divergence and EMD values
than JSCC-BOM in four different tasks, indicating its superior
capability in transmitting features. This performance gain
stems from SOM’s multilayer modulation, which progressively
refines semantic feature representations and uses low-order
constellations to promote transmission reliability. It minimizes
quantization errors caused by directly mapping semantics to
discrete symbols, thereby preserving similarity (reflected in
higher CosSim) and distribution fidelity (lower KL divergence
and EMD).
C. Prioritized Semantic Feature Transmission
In this section, our objective is to investigate the conjecture
that prioritizing the reliable transmission of important semantic

features can improve overall performance while reducing
unnecessary resource consumption. The determination of feature significance is inspired by a well-established observation
in DNNs: not all features have a significant impact on task
performance [51], [52], [53]. Fig. 11 provides a visual evidence of feature significance in image transmission. To assess
feature significance, each feature is occluded by replacing
its value with zero, and then the effect on task performance
is measured. A greater loss in task performance indicates a
higher significance of the occluded feature. On this basis,
the top X% significant features, defined as X% of features
that contribute most significantly to performance loss when
occluded, are transmitted with more transmission resources.
The remaining features are transmitted with fewer transmission
resources. The features in the darker red regions will result in
more performance loss once they are occluded, which means
they are of higher significance.
To validate this conjecture, the baseline method adopts SOM
configured with L = 6 and M = 64 to transmit all features,
i.e., a nonprioritized transmission. For prioritized transmission,
the top X% significant features are transmitted with more
transmission resources (i.e., transmitted adopting SOM with
L = 8 and M = 4). To maintain or reduce the overall
transmission cost, the remaining features are transmitted with
fewer resources, i.e., adopting SOM with L = 2 and M = 64.
In this simulation, we define the top 37.5%, top 50%, and
top 62.5% features as significant features in the prioritized
transmission method, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

28270

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 14, 15 JULY 2025

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF T RANSMISSION E FFICIENCY

Fig. 11. Visualization of feature significance in image transmission. The
features in the darker red regions will result in more performance loss once
they are occluded, which means they are of higher significance.

Fig. 12 shows the impact of prioritized semantic features on
the performance of image transmission. The results indicate
that allocating more communication resources to the top
37.5%, 50%, and 62.5% most significant features improves
both PSNR and SSIM. The reason is that more significant
features have a greater impact on task performance, while the
others have a smaller effect. The transmission overhead of
the four cases, i.e., nonprioritized transmission and prioritized
transmission for the top 37.5%, 50%, and 62.5% significant
features, is shown in Table II. Here, the semantic rate per
symbol r is defined as the ratio of the number of features to the
transmitted symbols, which denotes the efficiency of symbol
transmission. The prioritized transmission method achieves
a higher r, indicating that more features are represented
per transmitted symbol, suggesting a more efficient use of
transmission resources. The result shows that prioritized transmission for significant features, by allocating more resources
to them and fewer resources to less significant ones, highlights
the effectiveness of improving reliable transmission while
minimizing resource consumption.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 12. Impact of prioritized semantic feature transmission on performance
under different SNR, evaluated by (a) PSNR and (b) SSIM.

D. Wireless Transmission Experiment in Real Channel
To validate the proposed SOM in the real scenario,
we implemented a wireless SemCom system based on the
software-defined radio (SDR) platform for the experiment in
a real wireless channel. As shown in Fig. 13, we conducted
a wireless transmission experiment using two computers and
two SDR devices equipped with a single omnidirectional
antenna: one for transmission and the other for reception.
Both computers run the Windows 10 operating system and are
connected to their respective SDR devices via PCI Express

Fig. 13.
Demonstration of SemCom on an SDR-based communication
platform in a crowded indoor environment (Shenzhen, China).

(x4) interfaces. The SOM introduced in Section IV is implemented on both the transmitter (Tx) and the receiver (Rx).
Regarding parameters, we set the signal bandwidth to 200 kHz
and the center frequency to 900 MHz. The experiments were

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: SEMANTIC-ORIENTED MODULATION FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION

Fig. 14.

Complex number plots si obtained from an image transmission. (a) SOM. (b) JSCC-DT. (c) JSCC-BOM.

Fig. 15.

Examples of original images (a) and transmitted images using proposed SOM (b), JSCC-DT (c), and JSCC-BOM (d).

performed in a line-of-sight (LOS) environment, as depicted
in Fig. 13. Multipath propagation, caused by the dense signal
reflections from walls and furniture, is serious in the indoor
wireless channels.
In this experiment, we randomly selected 6432 × 32 color
images from the CIFA-10 dataset as shown in Fig. 15(a).
These images are transformed into semantic features via
the semantic encoder described in Section V-A, which is
specifically designed for image transmission. The semantic
features are then transmitted by SDR1 at the transmitter using
three different methods: 1) SOM; 2) JSCC-DT; and 3) JSCCBOM. At the receiver, SDR2 captures the wireless signal to
recover the semantic features according to the corresponding
method (i.e., SOM, JSCC-DT, or JSCC-BOM). Subsequently,
the semantic decoder, also described in Section V-A, is
employed to recover the original images.
Fig. 14 shows the complex number plots si of an image
transmission, where the red dots represent the transmitted
symbols and the blue circles represent the received symbols.
The quality of transmission is evaluated by the proximity of the
received symbols to their corresponding transmitted symbols.
The higher proximity indicates greater consistency between
transmitted and received signals, thus reflecting better CosSim
between the original and the recovered semantic features.
SOM achieves the best proximities among the three methods,
highlighting its superior capability in enhancing semantic
transmission performance.
As shown in Fig. 15, SOM, which employs discrete constellations for transmission, achieves outstanding performance
in terms of visual quality, transmission metrics (CosSim), and
task metrics (PSNR and SSIM). This further demonstrates

28271

Fig. 16. Latency comparison of transmitter and receiver processes for SOM,
JSCC-DT, and JSCC-BOM under different N.

that SOM effectively compensates for the gain loss caused
by the discretization of analog values during transmission,
in the meanwhile, being compatible with existing digital
communication systems.
Moreover, we are surprised to find out that a good byproduct
of SOM is latency reduction compared to JSCC-BOM in
Fig. 16. Specifically, we provide the computation complexity
of SOM and JSCC-BOM in the baseband processing part.
The computation complexity of SOM is O(N · L · log M),
while the JSCC-BOM benchmark suffers from O(N · log N)
complexity, where N is the number of features in the feature
vector, M is the order of modulation, and L is the number
of modulation layers. The complexity of JSCC-BOM in the
baseband processing part mainly comes from the iterative
channel decoding (e.g., LDPC belief propagation). Since M
and L are far smaller than N, log N grows asymptotically
faster than L · log M, demonstrating that the computation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

28272

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 14, 15 JULY 2025

complexity of SOM is always lower than that of JSCC-BOM.
Then, we measured the baseband processing latency on an
SDR platform. As shown in Fig. 16, the baseband processing
latency of JSCC-BOM grows significantly faster than that of
SOM with the increase of N. For example, both methods
exhibit similar latency at N = 128, while the latency of JSCCBOM grows nearly double in that of SOM at N = 512. This
makes it more suitable for real-time applications, e.g., AR/VR
communication and autonomous driving.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we proposed an SOM method to enable
direct mapping from an analog value of a semantic feature
to a sequence of discrete values to compensate for the
gain loss caused by the discretization of analog values. We
analyzed the semantic errors in SOM, including feature quantization errors and decision errors, revealing the relationship
between the number of layers, the modulation order, and the
performance of the semantic transmission. To validate the
performance of SOM, we conducted the simulation and realworld experiments for four different tasks, demonstrating its
applicability and superior performance in four different tasks.
The experiments also showed that allocating more resources
to significant features and fewer to less significant ones can
improve transmission efficiency while maintaining a high
performance. Furthermore, another good byproduct of SOM
is the lower latency compared to JSCC-BOM. In the future,
we will further explore the feasibility and performance of the
SOM method in more complex scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1] Q. Cui et al., “Overview of AI and communication for 6G network:
Fundamentals, challenges, and future research opportunities,” Sci. China
Inf. Sci., vol. 68, no. 7, 2025, Art. no. 171301.
[2] S. Li, Y. Wang, S. Guo, and C. Feng, “Task-oriented communication for graph data: A graph information bottleneck approach,” IEEE
Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., early access, Sep. 23, 2024,
doi: 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3465651.
[3] S. Guo, A. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Feng, and T. Q. S. Quek,
“Semantic-enabled 6G communication: A task-oriented and privacypreserving perspective,” IEEE Netw., early access, Mar. 4, 2025,
doi: 10.1109/MNET.2025.3547760.
[4] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. B. Kurka, and D. Gündüz, “Deep joint sourcechannel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cogn.
Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, Sep. 2019.
[5] H. Xie, Z. Qin, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Deep learning enabled
semantic communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69,
pp. 2663–2675, Apr. 2021.
[6] P. Jiang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Deep source-channel coding
for sentence semantic transmission with HARQ,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 5225–5240, Aug. 2022.
[7] H. Xie and Z. Qin, “A lite distributed semantic communication system
for Internet of Things,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 1,
pp. 142–153, Jan. 2021.
[8] Z. Weng and Z. Qin, “Semantic communication systems for speech
transmission,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 8,
pp. 2434–2444, Aug. 2021.
[9] T. Han, Q. Yang, Z. Shi, S. He, and Z. Zhang, “Semantic-preserved
communication system for highly efficient speech transmission,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 245–259, Jan. 2023.
[10] Z. Weng, Z. Qin, and G. Y. Li, “Semantic communications for speech
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2021,
pp. 1–6.
[11] E. Erdemir, T.-Y. Tung, P. L. Dragotti, and D. Gündüz, “Generative joint
source-channel coding for semantic image transmission,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 2645–2657, Aug. 2023.

[12] D. B. Kurka and D. Gündüz, “DeepJSCC-f: Deep joint source-channel
coding of images with feedback,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 178–193, May 2020.
[13] T.-Y. Tung and D. Gündüz, “DeepWiVe: Deep-learning-aided wireless
video transmission,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 9,
pp. 2570–2583, Sep. 2022.
[14] Y. Zhu et al., “A semantic-aware transmission with adaptive control
scheme for volumetric video service,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25,
pp. 7160–7172, 2023.
[15] J. Gu, X. Zhang, Q. Cui, and X. Tao, “Semantic communication for
multi-modal data transmission,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun.
Signal Process. (WCSP), 2023, pp. 208–213.
[16] M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural
networks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2673–2681,
Nov. 1997.
[17] E. Arisoy, A. Sethy, B. Ramabhadran, and S. Chen, “Bidirectional
recurrent neural network language models for automatic speech recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
(ICASSP), 2015, pp. 5421–5425.
[18] C. Liang et al., “Generative AI-driven semantic communication networks: Architecture, technologies and applications,” 2024,
arXiv:2401.00124.
[19] R. Cheng, Y. Sun, D. Niyato, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and M. Imran, “A
wireless AI-generated content (AIGC) provisioning framework empowered by semantic communication,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24,
no. 3, pp. 2137–2150, Mar. 2025.
[20] J. Dai, P. Zhang, K. Niu, S. Wang, Z. Si, and X. Qin, “Communication
beyond transmitting bits: Semantics-guided source and channel coding,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 170–177, Aug. 2023.
[21] Y. Shao and D. Gunduz, “Semantic communications with discrete-time
analog transmission: A PAPR perspective,” IEEE Wireless Commun.
Lett., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 510–514, Mar. 2023.
[22] T.-Y. Tung, D. B. Kurka, M. Jankowski, and D. Gündüz, “DeepJSCC-Q:
Channel input constrained deep joint source-channel coding,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2022, pp. 3880–3885.
[23] T.-Y. Tung and D. Gündüz, “SparseCast: Hybrid digital-analog wireless image transmission exploiting frequency-domain sparsity,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2451–2454, Dec. 2018.
[24] D. C. Montgomery and G. C. Runger, Applied Statistics and Probability
for Engineers. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2010.
[25] X. Luo, H.-H. Chen, and Q. Guo, “Semantic communications: Overview,
open issues, and future research directions,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 210–219, Feb. 2022.
[26] E. E. Elsayed and B. B. Yousif, “Performance enhancement of M-ary
pulse-position modulation for a wavelength division multiplexing free
space optical systems impaired by interchannel crosstalk, pointing error,
and ASE noise,” Opt. Commun., vol. 475, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 126219.
[27] E. E. Elsayed et al., “Coding techniques for diversity enhancement
of dense wavelength division multiplexing MIMO-FSO fault protection protocols systems over atmospheric turbulence channels,” IET
Optoelectron., vol. 18, nos. 1–2, pp. 11–31, 2024.
[28] T. Goblick, “Theoretical limitations on the transmission of data from
analog sources,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 558–567,
Oct. 1965.
[29] T.-Y. Tung, D. B. Kurka, M. Jankowski, and D. Gündüz, “DeepJSCCQ: Constellation constrained deep joint source-channel coding,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 720–731, Dec. 2022.
[30] E. Agustsson et al., “Soft-to-hard vector quantization for end-to-end
learning compressible representations,” in Proc. 31st Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
[31] A. V. Makkuva, X. Liu, M. V. Jamali, H. Mahdavifar, S. Oh, and
P. Viswanath, “Ko codes: Inventing nonlinear encoding and decoding
for reliable wireless communication via deep-learning,” in Proc. 38th
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 7368–7378.
[32] H. Yoo, L. Dai, S. Kim, and C.-B. Chae, “On the role of ViT and CNN
in semantic communications: Analysis and prototype validation,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 71528–71541, 2023.
[33] M. Wang, J. Li, M. Ma, and X. Fan, “Constellation design for deep
joint source-channel coding,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 29,
pp. 1442–1446, Jun. 2022.
[34] H. Xiao, Y. Hua, Q. Chen, and L. Zhou, “Constellation mapping design
using K-means clustering for analog joint source-channel coding based
on Shannon-Kotel’nikov mappings,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Joint Conf. Inf.
Commun. Eng. (JCICE), 2023, pp. 6–10.
[35] Y. Bo, Y. Duan, S. Shao, and M. Tao, “Joint coding–modulation for
digital semantic communications via variational autoencoder,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 5626–5640, Sep. 2024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: SEMANTIC-ORIENTED MODULATION FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION

[36] L. Teng, W. An, C. Dong, and X. Xu, “sDMCM—Semantic digital
modulation constellation mapping scheme for semantic communication,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Feb. 25, 2025,
doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3545667.
[37] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” 2015,
arXiv:1502.03167.
[38] I. Chung, D. Kim, and N. Kwak, “Maximizing cosine similarity
between spatial features for unsupervised domain adaptation in semantic
segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.,
2022, pp. 1351–1360.
[39] F. Rahutomo, T. Kitasuka, and M. Aritsugi, “Semantic cosine similarity,” in Proc. 7th Int. Student Conf. Adv. Sci. Technol. (ICAST), 2012,
p. 1.
[40] S. Ji, Z. Zhang, S. Ying, L. Wang, X. Zhao, and Y. Gao, “Kullback–
Leibler divergence metric learning,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 4,
pp. 2047–2058, Apr. 2022.
[41] Y. Rubner, C. Tomasi, and L. J. Guibas, “The earth Mover’s distance as
a metric for image retrieval,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 40, pp. 99–121,
Nov. 2000.
[42] F. Kharrat-Kammoun, S. Fontenelle, and J. J. Boutros, “Accurate
approximation of QAM error probability on quasi-static MIMO channels
and its application to adaptive modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1151–1160, Mar. 2007.
[43] D. Zwillinger and A. Jeffrey, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products.
Cambridge, MA, USA: Academic, 2000.
[44] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, Learning Multiple Layers of Features
from Tiny Images, Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2009.
[45] L. Deng, “The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine
learning research [best of the web],” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 29,
no. 6, pp. 141–142, Nov. 2012.
[46] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu, “Bleu: A method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation,” in Proc. 40th Annu.
Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguist., 2002, pp. 311–318.
[47] C. Valentini-Botinhao et al., “Noisy speech database for training speech
enhancement algorithms and TTS models,” School Inform. Centre
Speech Technol. Res., Univ. Edinburgh., Edinburgh, U.K., 2017.
[48] H. Wang, S. Zheng, Y. Chen, L. Cheng, and Q. Chen, “CAM++: A
fast and efficient network for speaker verification using context-aware
masking,” 2023, arXiv:2303.00332.
[49] H. Zhang, S. Shao, M. Tao, X. Bi, and K. B. Letaief, “Deep learningenabled semantic communication systems with task-unaware transmitter
and dynamic data,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 1,
pp. 170–185, Jan. 2023.
[50] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, pp. 600–612, 2004.
[51] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” in Proc. 13th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2014,
pp. 818–833.
[52] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32,
Oct. 2001.
[53] A. Fisher, C. Rudin, and F. Dominici, “All models are wrong, but many
are useful: Learning a variable’s importance by studying an entire class
of prediction models simultaneously,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 20,
no. 177, pp. 1–81, 2019.

Yangfan Wang is currently pursuing the master’s degree in information and communication
engineering with Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, China.
His current research interests include semantic
communication and wireless communication.

28273

Xuefei Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunications
engineering from Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in
2010 and 2015, respectively.
From 2013 to 2014, she visited the School of
Electrical and Information Engineering, University
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. She is currently an Associate Professor with the School
of Information and Communication Engineering,
BUPT. Her research interests include semantic
communication and satellite–terrestrial integrated network.
Yao Sun (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in communication and information
systems from the University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
He is currently a Lecturer with the James Watt
School of Engineering, The University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, U.K. He has extensive research experience in wireless communication area. His research
interests include intelligent wireless networking,
semantic communication, blockchain system, and
resource management in next-generation mobile
networks.
Dr. Sun has won the IEEE Communication Society of TAOS Best Paper
Award in 2019 ICC. He has been the guest editor for Special Issues of several
international journals. He has served as the TPC Chair for UCET 2021, and
the TPC Member for a number of international flagship conferences, including
ICC 2022, VTC spring 2022, GLOBECOM 2020, WCNC 2019, and ICCT
2019.
Qimei Cui (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering
from Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 2000
and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in
information and communications engineering from
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2006.
Since 2014, she has been a Full Professor with
the School of Information and Communication
Engineering, BUPT. She is currently a Professor of
the Department of Broadband Communication, Peng
Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. In 2016, she was a Visiting Professor
with the Department of Electronic Engineering, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN, USA. Her research interests include B5G/6G wireless
communications, mobile computing, and IoT.
Prof. Cui was a recipient of the Best Paper Award from the IEEE ISCIT
2012, the IEEE WCNC 2014, and the WCSP 2019, the Honorable Mention
Demo Award from the ACM MobiCom 2009, and the Young Scientist Award
from the URSI GASS 2014. She serves as a Technical Program Committee
Member for several international conferences, such as the IEEE ICC, the
IEEE WCNC, the IEEE PIMRC, the IEEE ICCC, the WCSP 2013, and the
IEEE ISCIT 2012. She serves as an Editor for Science China Information
Science, a Guest Editor for the EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications
and Networking, International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, and
Journal of Computer Networks and Communications, the Technical Program
Chair for the APCC 2018, the Track Chair for IEEE/CIC ICCC 2018, and
the Workshop Chair for WPMC 2016.
Xiaofeng Tao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1993, and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunication
engineering from Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in
1999 and 2002, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with BUPT and
the Department of Broadband Communication,
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. He has
authored or co-authored over 200 papers and three
books in wireless communication areas. His research interests include 5G/B5G
networks.
Prof. Tao is a Fellow of the Institution of Engineering and Technology and
the Chair of the IEEE ComSoc Beijing Chapter.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:32:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

