VQ-VAE Based Digital Semantic Communication
with Importance-Aware OFDM Transmission

arXiv:2508.08686v2 [eess.SP] 29 Dec 2025

Ming Lyu, Hao Chen, Dan Wang, Chen Qiu, Guangyin Feng, Nan Ma and Xiaodong Xu

Abstract—Semantic communication (SemCom) signiﬁcantly reduces redundant data and improves transmission efﬁciency by
extracting the latent features of information. However, most of
the conventional deep learning-based SemCom systems focus on
analog transmission and lack in compatibility with practical
digital communications. This paper proposes a vector quantizedvariational autoencoder (VQ-VAE) based digital SemCom system
that directly transmits the semantic features and incorporates
the importance-aware orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM) transmission to enhance the SemCom performance,
where the VQ-VAE generates a discrete codebook shared between
the transmitter and receiver. At transmitter, the latent semantic
features are ﬁrstly extracted by VQ-VAE, and then the shared
codebook is adopted to match these features, which are subsequently transformed into a discrete version to adapt the digital
transmission. To protect the semantic information, an importanceaware OFDM transmission strategy is proposed to allocate the
key features near the OFDM reference signals, where the feature
importance is derived from the gradient-based method. At the
receiver, the features are rematched with the shared codebook to
further correct errors. Finally, experimental results demonstrate
that our proposed scheme outperforms the conventional DeepSC
and achieves better reconstruction performance under low SNR
region.
Index Terms—Semantic communication (SemCom), feature importance, vector quantised-variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE),
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM), reference
signals.

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the exponential growth of wireless data trafﬁc driven
by rapid advancements in information technology, conventional
communication systems are reaching their physical and operational limits, highlighting the urgent need for more intelligent and efﬁcient communication paradigms. Concurrently,
the ﬂourishing development of deep learning has inspired
This work was supported by the National Science and Technology Major
Project - Mobile Information Networks under Grant No. 2024ZD1300700.
M. Lyu is with the Department of Broadband Communication, Pengcheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 518055, and also with the School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, 511442.
Email: lvm@pcl.ac.cn.
H. Chen, D. Wang and C. Qiu are with the Department of Broadband
Communications, Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 518055, Emails:
chenh03@pcl.ac.cn, wangd01@pcl.ac.cn, qiuch@pcl.ac.cn.
G. Feng is with the School of Microelectronics, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China, 511442. Email: gyfeng88@scut.edu.cn.
N. Ma and X. Xu are with the State Key Laboratory of Networking
and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, 100876, and also with the Department of Broadband
Communication, Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 518055. Email:
manan@bupt.edu.cn, xuxiaodong@bupt.edu.cn.

researchers to explore new paradigms for intelligent communication. Semantic communication (SemCom), which aims to
extract latent information via deep learning, is regarded to
signiﬁcantly reduce the redundant data [1], [2]. However, most
of the existing works transmit semantic features directly or
map them to analog symbols, resulting in incompatibility with
practical digital systems [3]–[5].
To address the above mentioned challenges, the authors in
[6] extended the classical deep joint source-channel coding
by quantizing semantic features which represented as vectors
into scalars for digital transmission. In contrast, the vector
quantized-variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE) is employed to
generate discrete feature indices, which is suitable for digital
transmission [7]. Moreover, VQ-VAE maps continuous latent
variables to a discrete codebook, serving as a shared knowledge
base between the transmitter and the receiver [8]. By transmitting only the indices of discrete features within the codebook,
the amount of data required to be transmitted is signiﬁcantly
reduced [9]. However, transmission errors of feature indices
lead to incorrect mappings in the codebook in complex channel
environments, where the retrieved features differ substantially
from the original ones, causing poor performance for image
reconstruction.
On the other hand, semantic importance has been widely
investigated to enhance transmission efﬁciency and robustness
by prioritizing the transmission of critical semantic features
[4], [10]. The authors in [10] studied an importance-aware
image transmission model in orthogonal frequency division
multiplexing (OFDM)-based SemCom systems, which maps the
critical semantic features into subcarriers with higher signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) to preserve key semantic information, thereby
enhancing the image reconstruction accuracy. However, most of
the existing OFDM-based SemCom systems still rely on end-toend optimization models and lack error correction mechanisms
of semantic features.
In this paper, we propose a novel VQ-VAE based digital
SemCom system that directly transmits the semantic features
and integrates the importance-aware OFDM transmission to
maintain compatibility with practical digital systems and reduce transmission errors under complex channel environments,
where the VQ-VAE generates a discrete codebook shared
between the transmitter and receiver. At VQ-VAE encoder,
the latent features are extracted and matched with the shared
codebook to produce discrete features, which are then directly
transmitted. To the best of our knowledge, most VQ-VAE-

VQ-VAE Encoder

D

Nearest
neighbour

H

OFDM
Transmitter

H

W
Source image

Feature Importance

D

Bit Quantification
W

J
D

Wireless
Channel

Shared Codebook

D

D
Nearest
neighbour

H

W
Reconstructed image
VQ-VAE Decoder

Bit De-quantification

H

OFDM
Receiver

W
Feature Importance-based OFDM Transmission

Fig. 1. VQ-VAE based digital SemCom system with importance-aware OFDM transmission.

based studies focus on the transmission of semantic indices,
while few have explored the direct transmission of semantic
features, particularly in the context of OFDM transmission.
Then, to enhance the protection of semantic features, the most
important semantic features are allocated near the reference
signals during the OFDM transmission process, where the
feature importance is determined through gradient-based evaluation. Finally, by leveraging a shared codebook and a feature
rematching mechanism at the receiver, the system enables
effective error correction during the wireless transmission of
semantic features.
II. S YSTEM M ODEL
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we consider a VQ-VAE based digital
SemCom system with importance-aware OFDM transmission,
where the transmitter and receiver are equipped with the VQVAE encoder and decoder, respectively. The VQ-VAE encoder
and decoder consist of a CNN for feature extraction and a
nearest-neighbor operation for feature discretization. The CNN
is composed of a series of convolutional layers followed by
parametric ReLU activation functions and residual blocks. A
common codebook E = [e1 , . . . ej , . . . eJ ] is generated by the
VQ-VAE, which is shared by the transmitter and receiver, with
ej ∈ RD being ﬁxed after the VQ-VAE training phase.
At transmitter, the VQ-VAE encoder is employed to extract discrete semantic features via the shared codebook. To
protect the semantic features, a gradient-based evaluator is
implemented to determine the importance weights of these
features, which allows the bit-quantized features to be allocated
at the OFDM transmitter. Here, the most important features are
allocated near the reference signals to reduce the channel distortion. At receiver, channel estimation is usually more accurate
for data located closer to the reference signals, resulting in
lower errors for important features and enhancing transmission
accuracy. After channel estimation and demodulation at the
OFDM receiver, the features are reconstructed via inverse bitquantization and subsequently input into the VQ-VAE decoder.

Finally, the received features are rematched with the shared
codebook to correct errors. Next, the detail of the proposed
semantic transmission scheme is introduced in sequel.
A. VQ-VAE Encoder
At the VQ-VAE encoder, an input image is represented by
a vector z ∈ Rl , and the neural networks of VQ-VAE ﬁrst
encodes z into a feature tensor ze ∈ RD×H×W , where D is
the number of features, and H ×W is the shape of each feature.
The process of extracting semantic features is represented as
ze = Nθ1 (z),

(1)

where Nθ1 (·) denotes the encoder CNN with parameter θ1 .
Then, the discrete latent features K = [k1 , . . . ki , . . . , kD ]
where K ∈ RD×H×W are calculated by a nearest neighbor
look-up using the shared codebook E with the feature tensor
ze . Speciﬁcally, each vector in ze is replaced by the closest
codebook entry in E in terms of Euclidean distance, i.e., [11]
K = arg min kze − ej k2 , ∀ej ,
ej

(2)

where k·k2 is the 2-norm, the resulting features K thus consist
of selected codebook vectors. Notably, we transmit the features
K rather than their corresponding indices in the codebook.
Subsequently, K is input into the OFDM-based digital semantic transmission module, which transmits the bit-quantized
semantic data according to their importance. The detailed
description of this module will be provided in Section III.
B. VQ-VAE Decoder
After transmission, the features K′ = [k′1 , . . . k′i , . . . , k′D ]
where K′ ∈ RD×H×W are inputed into decoder, where the
i-th feature error Ei can be represented as
Ei = ki − ki ′ 2 = Eb,i + Eh,i ,

(3)

where Eh,i and Eb,i denote the wireless channel transmission
errors and the bit quantization errors of the i-th feature,
respectively.

Unimportant Semantic

Reference signal
Important Semantic
Unimportant Semantic

Insert CP

Important Semantic

IDFT

Bit
Quantification

Allocation

Feature importance

Modulation

Reference signals

Reference
signals

Removal CP

Wireless
Channel

DFT

Channel
Estiamtion

De-llocation

Bit
De-quantification

Demodulation

OFDM Transmitter

Semantic data

(b)

OFDM Receiver
(a)

Fig. 2. (a) The proposed OFDM transmission with feature importance framework; (b) REs distribution on the OFDM
time-frequency resources grid.
Then, the distorted elements in K′ are rematched to the
vector ej in the shared codebook by a nearest neighbor look-up
to correct the errors, i.e.,
′

zq = arg min kK − ej k2 , ∀ej ,
ej

(4)

where zq ∈ RD×H×W is the corrected semantic features.
Next, we further analyze the error correction process of
the rematching mechanism. When the semantic features being
transmitted in K corresponds to the basis vector ei in the
codebook, the minimum distance dmin between ei and other
vectors ej in the codebook can be calculated as
J

dmin = min kej − ei k2 .
j=1

In this section, we propose a OFDM transmission with
feature importance framework, as shown in Fig. 2. Due to the
non-uniform channel quality across the OFDM time-frequency
resources, we adopt a discrete reference signals distribution
pattern [12], placing important semantic signals around the
reference signals.
A. OFDM Transmitter
After the VQ-VAE encoder, we extract the continuous-valued
semantic features ki undergo uniform bit-quantization [13],
yielding a discrete bitstream bi , which can be represented as

(5)

When Ei < dmin
2 , the transmission error of the feature can be

perfect corrected by rematching with the vectors in the shared
codebook through a nearest-neighbor look-up at the receiver.
Additionally, when Ei > dmin
2 , the error of feature mapped
to a neighboring vector, allowing for imperfect but effective
correction. For the index-based transmission method, features
are directly retrieved from the codebook using the transmitted
indices, making it unable to correct transmission errors. In
addition, an erroneous index may result in the mapping to a
vector that is signiﬁcantly distant from the original one.
Finally, the recovered semantic features zq are input into
the VQ-VAE decoder to reconstruct image z′ , which can be
represented as
(K′ ),
z′ = Nθ−1
2

III. OFDM T RANSMISSION WITH F EATURE I MPORTANCE
AWARENESS

(6)

(·) denotes the decoder CNN with parameter θ2 .
where Nθ−1
2
The decoder CNN inverts the operations performed by the
encoder through a series of transpose convolutional layers.
Our proposed feature rematching mechanism based on VQVAE signiﬁcantly improves the robustness of semantic feature
transmission and the quality of image reconstruction.

bi = Qc (ki ),

(7)

where Qc (·) denotes the uniform bit-quantizer, c is the number
of quantization bits. The quantization results can be represented
L
as B = [b1 , . . . bi , . . . , bD ] with bi ∈ {0, 1} , where L
denotes the total number of each feature bits. Since different
semantic features bi contribute unequally to image reconstruction ﬁdelity, a gradient-based evaluator is adopted to calculate
the importance of each feature.
The impact of each feature on image reconstruction is evaluated by analyzing the gradient variations of the loss L(z, z′ )
within the neural network, i.e.,
1
2
(8)
L(z, z′ ) = kz′ − zk ,
l
2

where k·k denotes the squared Euclidean norm.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst compute the gradients with respect
to
′
)
the i-th feature ki and obtain a gradient matrix ∂L(z,z
.
Then,
∂ki
by applying global average pooling to the gradient matrix, the
importance weights vector of the feature tensor K is denoted
as ω = [ω1 , . . . ωi , . . . , ωD ], i.e., [10]
H

ωi =

W

1 X X ∂L(z, z′ )
.
HW n=1 m=1 ∂ki,nm

(9)

For different values of ωi , the corresponding semantic features are mapped onto OFDM time-frequency resource elements (REs) with varying priorities, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
For simplicity, each unit in the time-frequency grid is denoted
as a RE: blue REs represent the reference signals, green REs
represent the important semantic symbols, blank REs represent
the unimportant semantic symbols. Subsequently, we map each
part step by step onto the OFDM time-frequency grid.
Firstly, the discrete reference signals are uniformly distributed over the time and frequency domains, which facilitates accurate estimation of the channel’s time-varying and
frequency-selective fading. Then, the numbers of important and
unimportant semantic features are calculated. Since semantic
symbols transmitted closer to reference signals achieve higher
accuracy, four green REs are allocated around each reference
signal, while the remaining REs are allocated to unimportant
semantic features. Suppose the total number of REs within
a coherent processing interval (CPI) is NCP I , and the total
number of reference signals is Nref . Then, the number of
REs allocated to important semantic is 4Nref , and the number of unimportant semantic is NCP I − 5Nref . Accordingly,
the total number of important semantic features is denoted
4Nref
. Finally, the top-Dimp semantic
as Dimp = D NCP I −N
ref
features, ranked by feature importance ω, are modulated and
sequentially mapped onto the green REs, while the remaining
semantic features are modulated and mapped onto the remaining blank REs.
After the semantic symbols are mapped onto the timefrequency resources, an inverse discrete Fourier transform
(IDFT) is applied and a cyclic preﬁx (CP) is added to generate
the transmitted signal x ∈ RNc ×Nt , as shown in Fig. 2(a). The
signal x then propagates through a time-frequency dual-varying
channel, resulting in the received signal y ∈ RNc ×Nt expressed
as
y = h ∗ x + n,

(10)
Nc ×Nt

is the
where ∗ denotes convolution operation, h ∈ R
impulse response of the multipath channel, and n is the
circularly symmetric complex Gaussian noise with zero mean
and variance CN (0, σ 2 I), where I ∈ RNc ×Nt being the identity
matrix.
B. OFDM Receiver
At the OFDM receiver, the received signal y undergoes
CP removal, followed by a discrete Fourier transform (DFT)
to convert it into the frequency domain, thereby enabling the
separation of reference signals and semantic data.
Subsequently, channel estimation is performed for the semantic data. The least squares (LS) method is ﬁrst employed
to estimate the channel hLS corresponding to the reference
signals. Based on hLS , bilinear interpolation is then applied to
obtain the estimated channel ĥ for the semantic data. Finally,
the estimated channel ĥ is used to equalize the semantic data.
In the following, the transmission errors in the feature
importance-based OFDM transmission are analyzed through

the channel estimation procedure. The channel estimation error
Eh , primarily arises from the LS estimation and bilinear
interpolation processes, can be expressed as
Eh = h − ĥ = ELS + Esd ,

(11)

where ELS and Esd denotes the error brought by the LS estimation and interpolation processes, respectively. The estimation
error ELS at the reference signal positions can be expressed as
o
n

σ2
2
ELS = E khLS − hk = E nH (xxH )−1 n = 2 , (12)
σx
where σx2 denotes power of the reference signals.
Suppose the values of the reference signals R11 (n0 , m0 ),
R12 (n0 , m1 ), R21 (n1 , m0 ) and R22 (n1 , m1 ) have been obtained through LS estimation, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Interpolation is ﬁrst applied along the horizontal axis, and then
along the vertical axis to compute the value of semantic data
S(n, m). The linear interpolation error Esd is represented
by the Lagrange interpolation remainder term, which can be
expressed as
M0
(m − m0 )(m1 − m)
2
[M1 (m1 − m) + M2 (m − m0 )](n − n0 )(n1 − n)
+
, (13)
2(m1 − m0 )

Esd ≤

where M0 , M1 , M2 are the bounded of the second-order partial
derivatives of the interpolated function.
Proof 1: Please see Appendix A.
From (13), it is observed that the distance between the semantic data and the reference signals controls the interpolation
error Esd . When important semantic data are positioned close
to the reference signals, their errors approximate the reference
signals estimation error ELS . In contrast, the unimportant
semantic data error is further affected by interpolation errors
Esd , which depend on the density of the reference signals. A
higher reference signals density results in a shorter distance to
the semantic data and thus a smaller interpolation error Esd .
After channel equalization, the semantic symbols are demodulated and the original feature ordering is restored to obtain the
output B′ . The bitstream B′ is then dequantized to recover the
semantic features K′ , which can be represented by
′
k′i = Q−1
c (bi ),

(14)

′
where Q−1
c (·) denotes the uniform bit-dequantizer. K is input
into the VQ-VAE decoder, where further error correction is
performed and the image is reconstructed.

Our proposed OFDM-based feature importance transmission
(FIT) scheme performs prioritized resource allocation through
channel conditions, where high-criticality semantic features
are allocated to time-frequency resources exhibiting superior
transmission characteristics, while low-importance features are
mapped to channel disadvantaged resources. This design enhances the protection of critical semantic information, thereby
improving the overall performance of SemCom.

IV. S IMULATIONS AND N UMERICAL R ESULTS

28

In this section, we verify the effectiveness of the proposed
OFDM-based digital SemCom system by numerical results.

26

A. Simulation Setup

B. Performance Evaluation
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show the PSNR and SSIM versus SNR for
different schemes. The performance increases with SNR for all
schemes, and the proposed scheme consistently outperforms the
baseline DeepSC scheme. Compared to conventional semantic
encoder-decoder architectures, VQ-VAE introduces a vector
quantization process that discretizes continuous features into
codebook. This discretization improves noise tolerance, leading
to superior performance compared to DeepSC. Moreover, the

PSNR

24
Proposed VQ-VAE + FIT
Proposed VQ-VAE
VQ-VAE + FIT
VQ-VAE
DeepSC

22
20
18
16
0

5

10

15

20

25

SNR (dB)
Fig. 3. The PSNR of the different schemes versus SNR.
0.9

0.8

0.7

SSIM

1) Dataset: Given our focus on the image reconstruction, we
have employed the CelebA-HQ dataset [14] containing 30,000
high-quality celebrity faces and resampled to 128×128 pixels
for convenience of testing.
2) OFDM Transceiver: Here, we consider the Rayleigh
fading channel. The carrier frequency and bandwidth we considered are 2.4 GHz and 20MHz, and can be applied across
various frequency ranges. For modulation, 16-QAM is applied
to the bitstream, and the CP length is set to 72. In a CPI,
the OFDM time-frequency resource grid is composed of 448
OFDM symbols and 792 subcarriers. The reference signals are
uniformly spaced with intervals of 4 in the time domain and 6
in the frequency domain. For simplicity, this works considers a
single antenna system to focus on the proposed digital SemCom
system.
3) VQ-VAE Implementation Details: The VQ-VAE encoder
consists of two strided convolutional layers with stride 2 and
window size 4×4, followed by two residual 3×3 blocks. The
VQ-VAE decoder follows a similar structure. We use the
ADAM optimiser with learning rate 2e-4 and the codebook size
is 1024. All models were trained under noiseless conditions,
using an RTX 3070Ti GPU. The VQ-VAE encoder compresses
the original image with dimensions 3×128×128 into semantic
features with dimensions 16×32×32, achieving a compression
rate of 1/3.
Peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity
index measure (SSIM) are used to evaluate the quality of
the reconstructed images. We compare the performance of the
following methods:
• Proposed VQ-VAE + FIT: The proposed VQ-VAE with
importance-aware transmission method.
• Proposed VQ-VAE: The proposed VQ-VAE without distinguishing importance-aware transmission.
• VQ-VAE + FIT: The VQ-VAE does not rematch the codebook at the receiver, with importance-aware transmission
method.
• VQ-VAE: The VQ-VAE does not rematch the codebook
at the receiver, without distinguishing importance-aware
transmission.
• DeepSC: The modiﬁed deep source coding scheme [3].

0.6

0.5
Proposed VQ-VAE + FIT
Proposed VQ-VAE
VQ-VAE + FIT
VQ-VAE
DeepSC

0.4

0.3
0

5

10

15

20

25

SNR (dB)

Fig. 4. The SSIM of the different schemes versus SNR.

proposed VQ-VAE corrects semantic errors caused by transmission noise at the receiver by rematching with the codebook,
further improving the performance of semantic transmission.
Additionally, the OFDM transmission method based on semantic importance further enhances the performance of SemCom.
This not only implies that SemCom is compatible with conventional communication frameworks, but also utilizes semantic
characteristics to improve communication system performance.
Our proposed scheme demonstrates greater effectiveness
under low SNR region. For example, at 15 dB, the proposed
VQ-VAE + FIT scheme achieves a 10.5% performance gain
over the VQ-VAE scheme, and this gain further increases to
34.1% at 5 dB, as shown in Fig. 4. In addition, the performance

SNR = 20dB

SNR = 15dB

SNR = 10dB

Source image

Proposed VQ-VAE +
FIT

Proposed VQ-VAE

VQ-VAE + FIT

VQ-VAE

DeepSC

Fig. 5. Visual reconstruction results under different semantic transmission schemes versus SNR.

gains provided by the proposed VQ-VAE are more signiﬁcant
than semantic importance transmission method.
Fig. 5 presents the visual reconstruction results under different semantic transmission schemes versus SNR. The proposed VQ-VAE schemes clearly outperform the DeepSC, primarily due to the noise robustness provided by discretized
semantic features. Moreover, our proposed VQ-VAE scheme
demonstrates substantial improvements in image reconstruction
quality, particularly under low SNR region. By reducing the
transmission error in important semantic features, the key
details and textures of the image are signiﬁcantly improved.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel VQ-VAE based digital
SemCom system with importance-aware OFDM transmission.
Firstly, a discrete codebook was generated by VQ-VAE and
shared between the transmitter and receiver. The VQ-VAE
encoder extracted the latent features and then matched with
the shared codebook to produce discrete features for digital
transmission. Then, to protect the semantic information, an
importance-aware OFDM transmission strategy was proposed,
which allocated the critical semantic signals near the reference symbols in the OFDM time-frequency grid based on the
feature importance derived from the gradient-based method.
Finally, experimental results demonstrated the superiority of
our proposed SemCom system over the conventional DeepSC
in reconstruction performance, with particularly notable improvements under low SNR region and strong compatibility
with practical digital system. Future work will concentrate on
end-to-end optimization of semantic transmission efﬁciency and
resource allocation strategies.

A PPENDIX A
T HE BILINEAR INTERPOLATION ERROR
The linear interpolation along the horizontal axis is ﬁrst
performed S1 using R11 and R21 , which is expressed as
n − n0
(R21 − R11 ),
(15)
S1 (n, m0 ) ≈ R11 +
n1 − n0
= ψn R21 + (1 − ψn )R11 ,
(16)
0
into (15).
where (16) is obtained by substituting ψn = nn−n
1 −n0
Similarly, the horizontal interpolation at S2 using R12 and
R22 is given by
n − n0
S2 (n, m1 ) ≈ R12 +
(R22 − R12 ),
(17)
n1 − n0
= ψn R22 + (1 − ψn )R12 ,
(18)
0
where (18) is obtained by substituting ψn = nn−n
into (17).
1 −n0
Finally, the vertical interpolation at S using S1 and S2 is
performed as
m − m0
S(n, m) ≈ S1 +
(S2 − S1 ),
(19)
m1 − m0
= ψm S2 + (1 − ψm )S1 ,
(20)

m−m0
into (19).
where (20) is obtained by substituting ψm = m
1 −m0
By substituting (16) and (18) into (20), the result S(n, m)
of bilinear interpolation is rewritten as

S(n, m) = ψm [ψn R22 + (1 − ψn )R12 ]
+ (1 − ψm )[ψn R21 + (1 − ψn )R11 ],

(21)

= (1 − ψm )(1 − ψn )R11 + ψm (1 − ψn )R12
+ ψn (1 − ψm )R21 + ψm ψn R22 ,
(22)
where (22) is obtained by simplifying (21).

The bilinear interpolation error Esd accumulates from the
remainders of the involved linear interpolations. When the
S1 (n, m0 ) to be interpolated possesses a second-order derivative, i.e., S1 ∈ C 2 ([n0 , n1 ]), the error of linear interpolation at
any point n ∈ [n0 , n1 ] is given by
R1 (n, m0 ) = S1 (n, m0 ) − P1 (n, m0 ),
(23)
f ′′ (ξ1 , m0 )
(n − n0 )(n1 − n),
(24)
=
2
where (24) is obtained by applying Taylor’s theorem with the
Lagrange remainder to (23); ξ1 ∈ [n0 , n1 ]; R1 (n, m0 ) is the
interpolation remainder term; and P1 (n, m0 ) is the interpolation
polynomial.
Similarly, the interpolation remainder at S2 (n, m1 ) is expressed as
R2 (n, m1 ) =

f ′′ (ξ2 , m1 )
(n − n0 )(n1 − n),
2

(25)

where ξ2 ∈ [n0 , n1 ].
The ﬁnal bilinear interpolation error is obtained by accumulating the remainders from the two horizontal linear interpolation steps with the vertical interpolation remainder. According
to (20), the interpolation remainder at S(n, m) is expressed as
¯ η)
f ′′ (ξ,
R(n, m) =
(m − m0 )(m1 − m)
2
+ ψm R2 + (1 − ψm )R1 ,
(26)
¯ η)
f ′′ (ξ,
(m − m0 )(m1 − m)
=
2
′′
f (ξ2 , m1 ) (m − m0 )(n − n0 )(n1 − n)
+
2
m1 − m0
f ′′ (ξ1 , m0 ) (m1 − m)(n − n0 )(n1 − n)
+
, (27)
2
m1 − m0
where (27) is obtained by substituting (24) and (25) into (26);
η ∈ [m0 , m1 ]; and ξ¯ ∈ [n0 , n1 ].
Since ξ1 , ξ2 and η are unknown, the interpolation error is
typically assessed via upper bounds on the remainder term.
To derive such bounds, we consider that the second-order
partial derivatives of the interpolated function are bounded
within the interpolation region; that is, there exist constants
M0 , M1 , M2 > 0 such that
¯ η)| ≤ M0 ,
|f ′′ (ξ,

(28)

′′

(29)

′′

(30)

|f (ξ1 , m0 )| ≤ M1 ,
|f (ξ2 , m1 )| ≤ M2 .

By substituting (28)-(30) into (27), the bilinear interpolation
error Esd is expressed as
M0
(m − m0 )(m1 − m)
2
[M1 (m1 − m) + M2 (m − m0 )](n − n0 )(n1 − n)
+
. (31)
2(m1 − m0 )

Esd = R(n, m) ≤

R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Lu, R. Li, K. Lu, X. Chen, E. Hossain, Z. Zhao, and
H. Zhang, “Semantics-Empowered Communications: A Tutorial-Cum-

Survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 41–79, Firstquarter 2024.
[2] Y. Sun, H. Chen, X. Xu, P. Zhang, and S. Cui, “Semantic Knowledge
Base-Enabled Zero-Shot Multi-Level Feature Transmission Optimization,” IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4904–4917, May
2024.
[3] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. Burth Kurka, and D. Gündüz, “Deep Joint SourceChannel Coding for Wireless Image Transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cogn.
Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, Sep. 2019.
[4] Q. Sun, C. Guo, Y. Yang, J. Chen, R. Tang, and C. Liu, “Deep Joint
Source-Channel Coding for Wireless Image Transmission with Semantic
Importance,” in IEEE Veh Technol Conf, London, United kingdom, Sep.
2022, pp. 1–7.
[5] H. Xie, Z. Qin, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Deep Learning Enabled
Semantic Communication Systems,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69,
no. 1, pp. 2663–2675, Apr. 2021.
[6] J. Huang, K. Yuan, C. Huang, and K. Huang, “D2 -JSCC: Digital Deep
Joint Source-Channel Coding for Semantic Communications,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1246–1261, Apr. 2025.
[7] Q. Hu, G. Zhang, Z. Qin, Y. Cai, G. Yu, and G. Y. Li, “Robust
Semantic Communications With Masked VQ-VAE Enabled Codebook,”
IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 8707–8722, Dec. 2023.
[8] P. Ye, Y. Sun, S. Yao, H. Chen, X. Xu, and S. Cui, “CodebookEnabled Generative End-to-End Semantic Communication Powered by
Transformer,” in IEEE INFOCOM - IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
Workshops, INFOCOM WKSHPS, BC, Canada, May 2024, pp. 1–6.
[9] S. Ma, W. Qiao, Y. Wu, H. Li, G. Shi, D. Gao, Y. Shi, S. Li, and N. AlDhahir, “Task-Oriented Explainable Semantic Communications,” IEEE
Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 9248–9262, Dec. 2023.
[10] K. Zhou, G. Zhang, Y. Cai, Q. Hu, G. Yu, and A. L.
Swindlehurst, “Feature Allocation for Semantic Communication with
Space-Time Importance Awareness,” Jan. 2024. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14614
[11] A. van den Oord, O. Vinyals, and k. kavukcuoglu, “Neural Discrete
Representation Learning,” in Adv. neural inf. proces. syst., CA, United
states, Dec. 2017, pp. 6307–6316.
[12] M. Lyu, H. Chen, D. Wang, G. Feng, C. Qiu, and X. Xu, “Reference
Signal-Based Waveform Design for Integrated Sensing and Communications System,” in IEEE Int Conf Commun, QC, Canada, Jun 2025, pp.
6621–6626.
[13] H. Zhang, S. Shao, M. Tao, X. Bi, and K. B. Letaief, “Deep LearningEnabled Semantic Communication Systems With Task-Unaware Transmitter and Dynamic Data,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 1,
pp. 170–185, Jan. 2023.
[14] T. Karras, T. Aila, S. Laine, and J. Lehtinen, “Progressive growing of
GANs for improved quality, stability, and variation,” in Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., ICLR - Conf. Track Proc., BC, Canada, May 2018, pp. 1–26.

