14332

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Semantic Codebook-Based HARQ for
Wireless Image Transmission
Gaohong Liang , Xuefei Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Ji Zhang , Yao Sun , Senior Member, IEEE,
Qimei Cui , Senior Member, IEEE, and Xiaofeng Tao , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Semantic communication (SemCom) lies in the
emphasis on ensuring the correct semantic understanding rather
than error-free bit transmission. However, traditional hybrid
automatic repeat request (HARQ) mechanism relies on a bit-level
check, and it cannot effectively address errors at the semantic
level. In this paper, we propose a semantic codebook-based
HARQ (SCB-HARQ) mechanism for the reliable and efficient
SemCom. To enable semantic-level error detection, SCB-HARQ
leverages a shared semantic codebook trained offline at both
the transmitter and receiver. This codebook serves as prior
information for evaluating the distortion of received semantic
features, quantifying the extent to which they deviate from
the intended meaning. To reduce the transmission overhead of
features in the codebook, a weighted semantic feature index
(WSFI) clustering method is introduced to map features into a
compact index representation. Then, a masked rate-adaptive joint
source-channel coding (JSCC) method is proposed to locate and
retransmit the distorted features. The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed SCB-HARQ outperforms the traditional
HARQ mechanism, achieving a 46.29% improvement in image
reconstruction performance while reducing the transmission data
volume by 51.27%.
Index Terms—HARQ, semantic communications, semanticlevel error checking, semantic codebook, weighted semantic
feature index.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE concept of semantic communication (SemCom), initially proposed by Weaver and Shannon [1], is based
on the principle of “semantic-meaning passing”. Currently,
SemCom has drawn a lot of interest as a new paradigm
to improve data transmission efficiency and robustness by
exploiting semantic information. The fundamental distinction
between SemCom and traditional syntactic communication
Received 9 January 2025; revised 5 July 2025; accepted 19 August 2025.
Date of publication 29 August 2025; date of current version 23 December
2025. This work was supported in part by National Key R&D Program of
China (2022YFB2902900), in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 62271073), and in part by PCL-CMCC Foundation for science
and innovation (2024ZY1A0010). The associate editor coordinating the review
of this article and approving it for publication was B. Soret. (Corresponding
author: Xuefei Zhang.)
Gaohong Liang and Xuefei Zhang are with the School of Information and
Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China.
Ji Zhang is with PA Company SC Branch, China Telecom Company Ltd.,
Chengdu 610000, China (e-mail: zhangxuefei@bupt.edu.cn).
Yao Sun is with the James Watt School of Engineering, the University of
Glasgow, G12 8QQ Glasgow, U.K.
Qimei Cui and Xiaofeng Tao are with the School of Information and
Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China, and also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory,
the Department of Broadband Communication, Shenzhen 518055, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2025.3604326

lies in its emphasis on ensuring the correct semantic understanding rather than error-free bit transmission [2], [3], [4].
The booming development of artificial intelligence (AI) has
significantly enhanced the performance of feature extraction
and reconstruction across diverse modalities of source data,
including text [5], speech [6], images [7], [8], [9], [10], [11],
[12], [13] and videos [14]. This advancement has expedited
the evolution of communication from a syntactic to a semantic paradigm, which conveys the “meanings” of transmitted
information rather than the raw data.
Most SemCom systems implement a deep joint sourcechannel coding (DJSCC) scheme, which typically comprises
two neural networks, as the semantic encoder and the semantic
decoder, respectively. A non-trainable layer is incorporated
between them to represent the channel. As such, the semantics of the source information is extracted, minimizing the
volume of data transmitted. Some early studies on SemCom
have shown the robustness in low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
and limited bandwidth conditions, compared with traditional
syntactic communication. Additionally, literature [15], [16],
[17], [18] integrate a channel adaptive module into the DJSCC
framework, further enhancing the robustness of SemCom
systems.
Despite the benefits mentioned above, it is possible that
the transmitted semantic features still become distorted due
to channel fading or interference during wireless transmission, ultimately leading to transmission failures. Thus, hybrid
automatic repeat request (HARQ) mechanism is a necessity to
improve transmission reliability. Traditional HARQ serves as
a cornerstone of reliable transmission in wireless communication systems [19]. The primary function of this mechanism
is to correct erroneous data packets. Upon detecting errors
in the received data, the receiver temporarily stores the corrupted packets and requests retransmission. The most common
technique used for error detection is cyclic redundancy check
(CRC), which depends on adding redundant bits in the original
message and then checking the received data.
In SemCom systems, the emphasis should be shifted to
the semantic-level check. As such, the conventional CRC
error detection method cannot be applied. Literature [20], [21]
utilize a semantic similarity detection network called SimCRC
for semantic error detection. Furthermore, the decoder proposed in [22] consolidates information received from previous
transmissions rather than discarding it to improve the transmission reliability. Notably, all the above-mentioned approaches
assume that the received semantic features should be totally
decoded to source data first, followed by entering SimCRC.

0090-6778 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIANG et al.: SEMANTIC CODEBOOK-BASED HARQ FOR WIRELESS IMAGE TRANSMISSION

As a result, although these approaches achieve semantic
error detection, they introduce additional latency before
retransmission compared to the conventional CRC method,
which performs error detection prior to source decoding.
Furthermore, only a few works have explored HARQ mechanisms for SemCom, which enable semantic error detection
prior to full data decoding [23], [24]. However, these
approaches suffer from significant limitations. The approach in
[23] relies heavily on a pre-trained distortion evaluation model
for semantic error detection, making it sensitive to minor
changes and often requiring retraining without substantial performance improvements. Additionally, literature [24] utilizes
similarity ranking to detect semantic errors, but it introduces
excessive communication overhead to establish these rankings
between the transmitter and receiver, rendering it impractical
for resource-constrained scenarios. Therefore, it is imperative
to find a new retransmission mechanism for SemCom.
Currently, several studies have also proposed codebookbased SemCom frameworks to enhance robustness and
transmission efficiency. For instance, the authors in [25]
propose a vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE)based SemCom framework, where only the indices of semantic
features within a codebook are transmitted. At the receiver,
the corresponding features are retrieved from the codebook
using the received indices, enabling the reconstruction of the
source data. Building upon this concept, [26], [27] further
employ generative models to reconstruct source content from
the received indices, thereby enhancing transmission performance by mitigating the effects of channel noise on semantic
representations. In addition, [28] utilizes a semantic-aware
codebook to improve the efficiency of semantic encoding.
Motivated by these advancements, we propose leveraging the features in the codebook as prior information for
semantic-level error checking, rather than relying on them
exclusively for data reconstruction. Specifically, by evaluating
the semantic similarity between the received features and the
corresponding features in the codebook, our method can detect
distorted features and trigger retransmission, thereby enabling
more reliable data transmission.
Therefore, this paper proposes a novel semantic codebookbased hybrid automatic retransmission request (SCB-HARQ)
mechanism that achieves semantic-level error detection. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to formally introduce a codebook-guided HARQ mechanism that
enables pre-decoding retransmission decisions, thereby bridging semantic understanding and transmission reliability in a
unified framework. The main contributions of this paper are
as follows:
• Semantic codebook: We design a two-stage semantic
codebook that serves as a lightweight prior for semantic error detection with minimal transmission overhead.
The codebook comprises two components: Basic Feature
Set: High-fidelity semantic feature vectors are extracted
via a VQGAN model to serve as reference for evaluating semantic consistency. Index-Map Set: To further
reduce transmission cost, we cluster the spatial distribution of features into compact index-map set using a
weighted semantic feature index-map (WSFI) metric that
accounts for both feature similarity and spatial seman-

14333

tics. The two-stage quantization encodes features into a
compact index, enabling low-overhead transmission and
supporting semantic-level error detection at the receiver.
• SCB-HARQ mechanism: The SCB-HARQ aims to
address two fundamental problems in SemCom. First,
it leverages the semantic codebook as prior information
to decide whether a semantic retransmission is needed.
Then, an masked rate-adaptive JSCC method is proposed
to identify the semantic features required retransmission.
In this way, SCB-HARQ retransmits only the distorted
features at an adaptive coding rate, enhancing both the
transmission reliability and efficiency.
• Simulation results demonstrate that SCB-HARQ
improves the transmission performance by 46.29%,
and reduces the required data transmission volume by
51.27%, significantly outperforming traditional HARQ
methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents a detailed review of related work. The system
model of SCB-HARQ is presented in Section III. The details
of the semantic codebook construction, the architecture of
the masked rate-adaptive JSCC, and the enhanced semantic
decoder network are presented in Section IV. In Section V,
the principle and training strategy of the SCB-HARQ are
presented. Simulation results are given in Section VI. Finally,
Section VII summarizes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
This section reviews the existing literature on SemCom
for wireless image transmission, followed by an analysis of
HARQ mechanisms currently applied in this field, which are
designed to further enhance the reliability and efficiency of
the data transmission.
A. SemCom for Image Transmission
In wireless image transmission, the SemCom approach
involves extracting rich semantic features from images at the
transmitter. These features are then transmitted by the DJSCC
scheme, followed by reconstruction at the receiver. Inspiringly,
SemCom achieves higher image reconstruction performance
than traditional communication, especially in the low bandwidth and low SNR condition. Specifically, a DJSCC method
for wireless image transmission proposed in [7] effectively
overcomes abrupt quality degradations, known as the “cliff
effect”. Afterwards, several modifications and extensions have
been provided in [15], [16], [17], [18], [29], [30], and [31]. For
instance, an adaptive SNR decoder based on DJSCC is devised
to enhance the robustness against channel noise in [15].
Furthermore, [18] integrates orthogonal frequency division
multiplexing (OFDM) into the DJSCC framework, increasing
robustness to dynamic channel conditions. Additionally, a
channel-adaptive DJSCC scheme utilizes estimated channel
state information (CSI) to allocate transmission power across
subchannels in [16]. On this basis, [17] proposes a policy
network that dynamically adjust the transmission rate based
on both the CSI and the image content, thereby promoting the
channel bandwidth utilization under the varying conditions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14334

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. The overall architecture of the proposed SCB-HARQ for wireless image transmission.

Although the studies mentioned above have proved that
SemCom can improve the transmission reliability, the semantic
distortion caused by the noises, channel fading, and interferences is a tough nut. As such, the integration of SemCom with
HARQ mechanisms seems a promising way for transmission
reliability promotion.
B. HARQ for SemCom System
HARQ stands for the hybrid automatic repeat request
(ARQ), implying the combination of forward error correction
(FEC) and ARQ feedback mechanism where the receiver sends
a retransmission request if an error is detected in the received
data. After receiving the request, the transmitter retransmits
the packets, thereby improving the transmission reliability. In
[9], the feedback mechanism is first introduced in SemCom by
providing the feedback relying on the CSI. This idea is further
extended in [10], where the encoder leverages the semantic
information and the feedback to generate coded symbols.
These studies discussed above primarily rely on the feedback from previous transmission to guide the encoding of
subsequent data, demonstrating that incorporating the positive
effect of feedback mechanisms on SemCom. Additionally,
[20] replaces the conventional CRC with a SimCRC model
to trigger retransmission. Then, [21] enhances the accuracy of
the error detection accuracy by analyzing the feature structure
of the reconstructed image. On the basis of SimCRC, [22]
proposes an incremental knowledge-based HARQ mechanism
for SemCom, where the semantic decoder integrates the
incremental knowledge from previous transmissions into the
semantic information in the retransmission.
However, the retransmission methods mentioned above need
the receiver decodes all semantic features prior to error detection, thereby resulting in the additional computing cost and
time. Furthermore, these methods usually rely on transmitting
redundant information multiple times, lacking of the ability to
accurately identify and correct the specific distorted semantic
features.
To address above problem, [23] proposed a feature distortion
evaluation (FDE) network to measure semantic similarity
between the original feature and its reconstructed counterpart before data reconstruction. However, the FDE model’s

reliance on a predefined semantic similarity metric makes
it highly sensitive to changes in the metric formulation. As
even minor modifications to the metric function can disrupt
the metric’s distribution, often requiring retraining without
yielding substantial benefits. To overcome this limitation, [24]
utilizes similarity ranking to capture the relative semantic
relationships between original and reconstructed features. But
it is impractical in the resource-constrained scenarios due
to the cost of more exchanges between the transmitter and
receiver to establish the similarity ranking.
These limitations underscore the need for a semantic error
detection and retransmission mechanism that is both robust
to metric variations and efficient in communication overhead.
Motivated by this, we propose a semantic codebook-based
HARQ (SCB-HARQ) framework, which leverages compact
semantic priors to enable low-cost and accurate semantic-level
error control.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL
In this section, we describe the system model of SCBHARQ for wireless image transmission, mainly consisting
of the transmitter, the stochastic wireless channel and the
receiver, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
A. Transmitter
As shown in Fig. 1, the source image x ∈ RH×W ×3 , where
H, W , and 3 denote the height, width, and color channels of
the RGB image, is fed into the semantic encoder Fs (·, θs ),
parameterized by θs . The semantic features are extracted as
Z ∈ RM ×M ×B , where B represents the number of feature
map channels, and each feature map has dimensions M × M .
Subsequently, Z is used as the input for both the semantic
codebook and the rate-adaptive JSC encoder, respectively.
The features in Z are matched with the entries in the
semantic codebook through a two-stage quantization process,
yielding the corresponding index V represented as a fixedlength integer. Due to the minimal number of bits required
for V , it is assumed to be transmitted error-free by the
control channel, consistent with the configuration in [32] and
[33]. Simultaneously, the rate-adaptive JSC encoder function
Fc (·, θc ), parameterized by θc , maps Z into the output signal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIANG et al.: SEMANTIC CODEBOOK-BASED HARQ FOR WIRELESS IMAGE TRANSMISSION

Y = Fc (Z, θc ). During the r-th retransmission, the retransmitted features are selected based on HARQ feedback fr ,
which acts as a mask to correctly select the received features,
ensuring that the encoding focuses exclusively on the features
that require retransmission. The retransmitted features are
then encoded into a variable-length vector Yr ∈ CL , where
the length L depends on the number of retransmissions r.
This design allows the coding length to adapt dynamically to
the prevailing transmission conditions, ensuring efficient and
flexible communication.
At the first transmission, Y is transmitted over a stochastic wireless channel, which can either be an additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel or Rayleigh fading channel.
Consequently, the output of the channel is denoted as Ŷ and
is given by:
(
h · Y + η, for Rayleigh fading channel;
(1)
Ŷ =
Y + η,
for AWGN channel;
where η denotes the white Gaussian noise, modeled as
η ∼ CN 0, σ 2 Ik , indicating a independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian distribution with zero mean and
variance σ 2 . For the Rayleigh fading model, the multiplicative
effect of the channel gain on the transmitted signal is captured
by H (Y ) = h · Y , where h follows Rayleigh distribution.
B. Receiver
The error-free received index V is used directly to retrieve
the corresponding feature vectors Zq from the semantic codebook. At the same time, the rate-adaptive JSC decoder function
Gc (·, φc ), parameterized by φc , decodes the received signal Ŷ
to the semantic feature vectors Ẑ = Gc (Ŷ , φc ).
Next, the decision function DEC(·) evaluates the semantic
similarity between each received feature ẑ(i,j) in Ẑ and its
(i,j)
in Zq . Here, i and j denote the
corresponding feature zq
horizontal and vertical indices in the feature map, allowing
for precise evaluation of semantic distortion at the level of
individual features. On this basis, the DEC(·) generates a
binary feedback vector f , indicating the features in Ẑ that
require retransmission. This process will be repeated until
either accomplishing a successful transmission or reaching the
maximum number of retransmissions.
After all the transmissions, the enhanced semantic decoder
Gs (·, φs ) uses the received vectors Ẑ and Zq together to
recover the source image x̂ ∈ RH×W ×3 , where φs represents
the parameters of the semantic decoder.
IV. K EY C OMPONENTS IN SCB-HARQ
This section presents a detailed explanation of some key
components in SCB-HARQ, e.g., the semantic codebook, the
masked rate-adaptive JSCC scheme and the enhanced semantic
decoder. Firstly, the semantic codebook is investigated as
a prior information for semantic error detection. Then, the
masked rate-adaptive JSCC scheme is designed to identify
which semantic features need to be retransmitted. Finally,
the enhanced semantic decoder is designed to use the quantized features and the received features together for image
reconstruction.

14335

A. Semantic Codebook
The semantic codebook consists of two main components:
a basic feature set Z and an index-map set I. The basic
feature set Z comprises a collection of representative semantic
feature vectors extracted from image datasets. The index-map
set I, on the other hand, contains a set of prototypical spatial
configurations of feature indices, obtained by clustering the
index-maps derived from Z. During transmission, each source
image is matched to its closest index-map in I, and only
the corresponding compact index V is transmitted, instead
of the full index-map. This design substantially reduces the
transmission overhead while preserving essential semantic
structure.
1) The Basic Feature Set: To obtain the basic feature set Z,
we utilize the framework of VQGAN [34]. In this framework,
the semantic encoder first maps the image features to a series
of discrete feature vectors, which captures the segments of the
real texture information from the source image. Subsequently,
the semantic decoder weights and combines discrete feature
vectors to reconstruct the image.
As depicted in Fig. 2, the source image x is fed into
the encoder to extract the semantic feature map Z ∈
RM ×M ×B , where each spatial location (i, j) corresponds to a
B-dimensional feature vector z(i,j) that represents the semantic
embedding of the local patch at that position. These feature
vectors are then passed through a quantization module. In this
module, each feature vector z(i,j) is replaced by the nearest
1
vector from the basic feature set Z = {znq }N
n=1 , where N1
denotes the size of the basic feature set. The nearest codebook
(i,j)
is determined based on the Euclidean distance
vector zq
between the feature vector z(i,j) and the vectors in Z, which
is given as:
z(i,j)
= arg min
z(i,j) − znq .
q
n
zq ∈Z

(2)

The quantized feature tensor Zq is then constructed by
(i,j)
to its correassigning each selected codebook vector zq
sponding spatial location (i, j). This process is summarized
as:
n
o
Zq = z(i,j)
|
(i,
j)
∈
[1,
M
]
×
[1,
M
]
,
(3)
q
where [1, M ]×[1, M ] denotes the set of all spatial coordinates
in the M × M feature map. As such, Zq retains the spatial
structure of the original feature tensor Z while discretizing its
content using vectors from Z. The resulting Zq is then fed
into the semantic decoder to reconstruct the output image x̂.
The formula of this process is provided below:
x̂ = G (Zq , φs ) = G (q (F (x, θs )) , φs ) .

(4)

Beyond the standard autoencoder structure, VQGAN integrates a discriminator network that distinguishes between real
and generated images. It is worth noting that this adversarial
learning framework allows the basic feature set to capture
more detailed and real semantic features. Therefore, reconstructed image x̂ closely approximates the source image while
preserving finer details and textures [35].
For clarity, we visualize the texture semantics of the basic
feature set, represented by the blue-grey shaded components

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14336

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 2. VQGAN-based framework for basic feature set construction.

in Fig. 2. This visualization is presented as a 3 × 3 grid
of small images, where each small image corresponds to a
feature vector in the basic feature set, illustrating the specific
texture semantic information extracted from the source image.
Notably, the superposition of multiple semantic features can
capture more comprehensive and realistic texture information,
demonstrating that the constructed basic feature set Z effectively represents diverse texture semantics [36]. This capability
provides a solid foundation for semantic error detection and
image reconstruction.
2) The Index-Map Set: Based on the basic feature set, any
source image x can be represented by a spatial collection of
quantized features Zq ∈ RM ×M ×B . An equivalent representation is an index-map I ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N1 }M ×M , as shown
at the bottom center of Fig. 2, which specifies the respective
entries in the basic feature set. However, direct transmission of
the full index-map I incurs substantial overhead. Specifically,
each spatial location requires log2 (N1 ) bits. The index-map
contains M 2 entries, resulting in a total of M 2 log2 (N1 ) bits
per image. Such overhead significantly exceeds the payload
capacity of the control channel in practical wireless systems
for free error, rendering direct transmission infeasible.
To reduce transmission overhead, we employ an indexmap to convert Zq into a compact representation. This is
accomplished by clustering similar index-maps to form a
representative set, denoted as I. To this end, we introduce
a novel distance metric, termed the weighted semantic feature index-map (WSFI) distance, as detailed in Section V-B.
WSFI captures structural similarities among image indexmaps, enabling more effective clustering into a compact set
of representative patterns. Rather than transmitting the entire
index-map, only the cluster index V is sent, requiring just
log2 (N2 ) bits, where N2 is the size of I. This significantly
reduces control channel usage from M 2 log2 (N1 ) to log2 (N2 ),
while preserving the global semantic structure necessary for
robust error detection.
Overall, the semantic codebook provides auxiliary information specifically for semantic error detection, which is crucial

for balancing semantic fidelity and transmission efficiency.
The basic feature set Z ensures diverse and robust feature
representations, while the index-map set I compresses these
representations into compact indices, reducing transmission
overhead with minimal loss of semantic content.
B. Masked Rate-Adaptive JSCC
In the proposed masked rate-adaptive JSCC framework,
binary feedback f is used as a spatial mask to identify semantic features requiring retransmission. These masked features
are then processed by a JSCC module composed of multiple
independently trained encoder-decoder pairs, each designed to
operate at a specific coding rate.
To support adaptive rate control, we define the image
dimension n = H × W × 3 as the source bandwidth, and the
channel dimension k = C ×M ×M as the channel bandwidth,
where C denotes the number of output channels in the encoder.
Since k is typically smaller than n, the resulting coding process
involves bandwidth compression. The compression ratio, or
coding rate, is given by:
k
C · M2
=
.
(5)
n
H ·W ·3
This coding rate R serves as a critical design parameter and
is adjusted by modifying the number of output filters in the
encoder’s convolutional layers. By increasing or decreasing
C, the encoder flexibly adapts to different channel bandwidth
constraints, balancing compression efficiency and robustness
to transmission errors.
To accommodate varying rate requirements across diverse
channel conditions, we construct a set of U JSCC
encoder-decoder pairs, each targeting a predefined rate Ru ,
where u ∈ {1, 2, . . . , U }.
R=

C. Enhanced Semantic Decoder
At the receiver, we propose an enhanced semantic decoder
combining the outputs of the semantic codebook and the rateadaptive JSC decoder. Given that quantization errors from

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIANG et al.: SEMANTIC CODEBOOK-BASED HARQ FOR WIRELESS IMAGE TRANSMISSION

Fig. 3. The detailed architecture of the enhanced semantic decoder in
SCB-HARQ.

14337

Specifically, V is matched with I to retrieve the corresponding index-map I, which is then used to recover quantized
features Zq from Z, effectively reversing the transmitter’s
feature-to-index mapping process. The received signal Ŷ0 is
decoded by the rate-adaptive JSC decoder 0 to obtain the
reconstructed features Ẑ0 . Subsequently, the decision function
DEC(·) computes the cosine similarity between the received
feature vector ẑ(i,j) in Ẑ and its corresponding quantized
(i,j)
feature vector zq
from Zq . Here, (i, j) denotes the spatial
location corresponding to the i-th row and j-th column of
the feature map, enabling fine-grained semantic distortion
assessment. The similarity score S (i,j) is calculated as:
(i,j)

the semantic codebook and transmission errors from the JSC
decoder may result in a negative impact reconstruction quality,
respectively.
The decoder adopts a dual-branch architecture. The first
branch takes the JSCC-decoded features Ẑ as the primary
input, which preserves detail but may be noisy. The second
branch uses the quantized semantic features Zq from the
codebook, which are more stable but may lack high-frequency
details. To fuse these complementary inputs, we introduce
a residual correction module composed of stacked residual
blocks and group normalization layers. The final reconstructed
image x̂ is obtained by:


x̂ = Gs Ẑ, Zq , φs
(6)
In this formulation, the enhanced decoder achieves more
accurate and robust reconstruction compared to conventional
single-branch designs. The detailed structure is illustrated in
Fig. 3.
V. S EMANTIC C ODEBOOK -BASED HARQ
In this section, the process of SCB-HARQ is proposed.
Meanwhile, three training phases of SCB-HARQ are provided
in detail.
A. SCB-HARQ
The structure of the SCB-HARQ system is shown in Fig. 4,
which is divided into two parts: the upper part describes
how the semantic codebook maps the extracted features of
semantic encoder to their corresponding indices, and the lower
part details the retransmission procedure facilitated by the
rate-adaptive JSCC scheme.
As shown in the upper part of Fig. 4, the semantic encoder
extracts the features Z, which are then matched with Z by
Eq.2. This process produces the quantized features Zq and
an index-map I. Subsequently, the index-map I is flattened,
and the nearest one is retrieved from the index-map set I,
generating the corresponding index V .
As shown in the lower part of Fig. 4, the features Z are
encoded by the rate-adaptive JSC encoder 0 into the initial
transmission signal Y0 . The transmitter concatenates V and
Y0 before transmitting them to the receiver. Importantly, V is
transmitted error-free by control plane, ensuring reliable and
accurate recovery of the quantized features at the receiver.

S (i,j) =

ẑ(i,j) · zq

(i,j)

kẑ(i,j) k2 kzq

k2

(7)

where the operator (·) indicates the dot product, and k · k2
denotes the L2 norm. Cosine similarity is chosen due to its
proven effectiveness in semantic feature comparison and deep
representation learning. Importantly, the SCB-HARQ framework is inherently agnostic to the choice of similarity metric
and can be readily adapted to utilize alternative measures such
as Euclidean distance or L1 distance for evaluating semantic
consistency.
Based on a predefined semantic similarity threshold ξt , the
binary feedback mask f ∈ {0, 1}M ×M is generated as:
(
1, if S (i,j) ≥ ξt ,
(i,j)
(8)
f
=
0, otherwise,
where f (i,j) = 1 indicates that the semantic feature at location
(i, j) is accepted, while f (i,j) = 0 triggers retransmission.
In addition, when there are still features in the (r − 1)-th
transmission that are not received correctly, a binary feedback
vector fr is generated to precisely identify features that have
undergone semantic distortion and require retransmission. It
acts as a mask to trigger the r-th retransmission. On this
basis, the distorted features, represented as Zr , are selected and
encoded by a rate-adaptive JSC encoder to produce the retransmission signal Yr . The masking mechanism ensures that only
distorted features are retransmitted, effectively minimizing
bandwidth usage. Moreover, the proposed system achieves an
optimal balance between transmission efficiency and semantic
accuracy by dynamically adjusting the encoding rate during
retransmission.
After the r-th retransmission, the receiver obtains Ẑr , and
S is recalculated by DEC(·). The retransmission repeats until
S reaches a threshold or the maximum number of retransmissions is reached. Finally, Ẑ, which aggregates features
from multiple transmissions, are combined with the quantized
features Zq to reconstruct the image.
B. Training Strategy
The training of the SCB-HARQ system is conducted in
three distinct phases. In Phase 1, the semantic codec and
codebook are constructed. Phase 2 focuses on training multiple
JSC encoder-decoder pairs for the rate-adaptive JSCC scheme.
Finally, Phase 3 is integrated with the previously trained components to enable end-to-end SCB-HARQ communication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14338

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 4. Illustration of the SCB-HARQ system structure, showing the semantic codebook matching process and the retransmission procedure.

Each phase builds upon the foundation established by the
previous one, with the overarching objective of improving
system efficiency and reliability for image transmission.
1) Phase 1 Joint Construction of Semantic Codec and
Semantic Codebook: In this phase, we focus on the joint construction of the semantic codec and codebook. To achieve this,
we establish a semantic feature-aware loss function Lperceptual
for training the VQGAN model, which is formulated as:
Lperceptual = kx − x̂k1 + kFs (x, θs ) − Gs (x, φs )k22 ,

(9)

where kx − x̂k1 measures the average absolute difference
between the output x̂ and the source image x. The term
kFs (x, θs ) − Gs (x, φs )k22 denotes the perceptual loss, which
captures the semantic feature discrepancies between the output
and the source data in a high-dimensional space. This perceptual loss encourages the model to focus on semantic accuracy
during pre-training, promoting the restoration of more realistic
and semantically consistent features.
Due to the quantization operation in Eq.4 is nondifferentiable, we employ the straight-through gradient estimator [35], [37], [38] to approximate gradients by directly
copying them from the decoder to the encoder, such enabling

end-to-end training using the code-level loss function:
LVQ = ksg(Z) − Zq k22 + βksg(Zq ) − Zk22 ,

(10)

where sg(·) denotes the stop-gradient operator, and β is a
weight parameter that controls the update rates for the encoder
and the basic feature set.
Since we employ a generative adversarial network as the
generator module in the VQGAN, the total loss function for
Phase 1, denoted as LPhase1 , incorporates the adversarial loss
function LGAN . Thus, the overall loss function for Phase 1 is
given by:
LPhase1 = LVQ + λLGAN + γLperceptual ,

(11)

where λ and γ are the weighting factors for LGAN and
Lperceptual , respectively.
Using the loss function LPhase1 , the VQGAN network is
trained to produce the basic feature set, along with the
semantic encoder and decoder. Once the basic feature set is
generated, constructing index-map set I can be modeled as
a clustering problem. To construct I, we propose WSFI as
a distance metric to guide the clustering process. This metric
jointly evaluates the similarity between training samples based
on two dimensions:
• the semantic similarity of their quantized feature tensors;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIANG et al.: SEMANTIC CODEBOOK-BASED HARQ FOR WIRELESS IMAGE TRANSMISSION

• the structural similarity of their corresponding
index-maps.
Consider two training samples denoted by (Zq1 , I1 ) and
(Zq2 , I2 ), where Zq1 and Zq2 denote the quantized semantic
feature tensors, and I1 and I2 are the associated index-maps.
The WSFI distance between them is defined as:
DW SF I ((Zq1 , I1 ), (Zq2 , I2 )) , Df eature (Zq1 , Zq2 )
+αDindex−map (I1 , I2 ) ,

(12)

where Dfeature (·) and Dindex-map (·) represent the mean squared
error (MSE) between quantized features and index-maps,
respectively. The weighting coefficient α ≥ 0 balances their
relative contributions.
Building upon Eq.12, the WSFI distance is further introduced to model the semantic similarity between a training
sample (Zq , I) and a candidate set of index-maps A,
associated with corresponding quantized feature ZA . This
relationship is formally defined as:
A
DWSFI
((I, Zq ), (A, ZA )) , min DWSFI ((I, Zq ), (A, ZA )) ,
A∈A
(13)
where (ZA , A) denotes a single candidate pair within the
dataset (ZA , A).
The subsequent step employs Eq. 13 to guide the learning
of an optimal index-map set I. Specifically, the training
objective is to minimize the expected WSFI distance between
each training sample (Zq , I) and its closest centroid in I,
thereby ensuring that the learned centroids are semantically
representative. Accordingly, the objective function used during
the clustering process is defined as:
 I

(I, I, Zq , ZI )
(14)
min E(I,Zq )∼p(I,Zq ) DWSFI
I

s.t.

I = {Ic(1) , Ic(2) , . . . , Ic(N2 ) },

(15)

ZI = {ZI (1) , ZI (2) , . . . , ZI (N2 ) }.

(16)

c

c

c

where E(I,Zq )∼p(I,Zq ) [·] denotes the expectation over the pair
(I, Zq ) drawn from the distribution p(I, Zq ). The index-map
(1)
(N )
set I = {Ic , . . . , Ic 2 } represents the centroids to be
(i)
optimized, where each Ic is selected from the training dataset
and is associated with a quantized feature map ZI (i) . The set
c
ZI = {ZI (1) , . . . , ZI (N2 ) } collects these feature maps for all
c
c
I
centroids. The function DWSFI
(·) computes the WSFI distance
between the sample (I, Zq ) and its closest centroid in I,
considering both index-map and semantic feature similarity.
The clustering problem can be solved using learningbased algorithms, particularly the K-means algorithm, which
iteratively refines the centroids to minimize WSFI distance.
The details of the basic feature set and the index-map set
construction are provided in Algorithm 1.
2) Phase 2 Information-Theoretic Modeling of Masked
Rate-Adaptive JSCC: In this phase, we construct a theoretical model for the masked rate-adaptive JSCC scheme
based on mutual information maximization. The goal is to
reliably retransmit a subset of semantic features under a
constrained bandwidth. The selected features are denoted as
Zf = Mask(Z, f ). These features are encoded by the JSCC
encoder Fc (·, θc ) into the transmission signal Y , which is

14339

Algorithm 1 Joint Construction of Semantic Codec and
Semantic Codebook
Stage 1: : Basic feature set construction.
Input: A batch of x.
Output: Basic feature set Z, semantic codec, x̂.
Initialization: The basic feature set Z, the parameters of
VQGAN: β, λ, γ, α.
1: for training iterations do
2:
Z ← Fs (x, θs ).
3:
Quantization by Eq. 2.
4:
Image reconstruction by Eq. 4.
5:
Compute loss function value via Eq. 11 and update
parameters: β, λ, γ, α.
6: end for
Stage 2: K-means-based index-map set construction.
Input: A tuple (Zq , I).
Output: A set of feature index-maps I.
Initialization: The clustering centers by randomly selecting
N2 index-maps.
7: repeat
8:
Calculate the WFSI distance by Eq. 12.
9:
Choose the closest clustering center by Eq. 13.
10:
Update the centroids of the clusters by Eq. 16.
11: until Convergence, i.e., the centroids no longer change
significantly.

subsequently distorted by the wireless channel and received
as Ŷ . The decoder Gc (·, φc ) then reconstructs the semantic
representation Ẑf from Ŷ .
To maximize information preservation during retransmission while controlling the coding rate, we define the following
constrained optimization problem:
max

I(Zf ; Ŷ )

(17)

s.t.

k/n ≤ Rmax ,

(18)

θc ,φc

where Rmax is the maximum allowable rate determined by the
channel resource budget. To facilitate optimization, we adopt
a variational approximation pφc (Ẑf | Ŷ ) to the true posterior
p(Zf | Ŷ ), modeled by the decoder network.
Theorem 1: Suppose both the true and variational posteriors follow multivariate Gaussian distributions with isotropic
covariance:
p(Zf | Ŷ ) = N (Zf ; µ(Ŷ ), σ 2 I),
2

pφc (Ẑf | Ŷ ) = N (Gc (Ŷ ), σ I).

(19)
(20)

The variational lower bound of I(Zf ; Ŷ ) can be expressed
as:
i
1 h
(21)
I(Zf ; Ŷ ) ≥ − 2 E kZf − Ẑf k2 + a,
2σ
where a denotes a constant. The complete proof of Theorem 1
can be found in Appendix A.
During inference, the system dynamically selects one of the
trained encoder-decoder pairs based on retransmission feedback, such as the number of previous transmission attempts.
This design enables flexible, efficient, and robust semantic
retransmission across diverse channel conditions. The training

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14340

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Algorithm 2 Training Procedure for the Masked RateAdaptive JSCC
Input: A batch of training images x, semantic encoder
Fs (x, θs ), semantic decoder Gs (x̂, φs ).
Output: Reconstructed image x̂; multiple JSCC encoderdecoder pairs trained for different target rates.
1: Initialize: Parameters θc and φc for the JSCC encoder
and decoder.
2: for each predefined target rate Ru do
3:
Configure encoder Fc (·; θc ) and decoder Gc (·; φc ) with
output channel size C corresponding to R` .
4:
Z ← Fs (x; θs ).
5:
Zf ← Mask(Z, f ).
6:
Y ← Fc (Zf ; θc ).
7:
Ŷ ← Channel(Y ).
8:
Ẑf ← Gc (Ŷ ; φc ).
9:
x̂ ← Gs (Ẑf ; φs ).
10:
Compute reconstruction loss between x and x̂ using
Eq. (21).
11:
Update parameters θc and φc to minimize the loss.
12: end for

procedure for these rate-adaptive JSCC modules is described
in Algorithm 2.
3) Phase 3 Information-Theoretic Modeling of the SCBHARQ System: In the final phase, the SCB-HARQ system
integrates semantic codebook, the masked rate-adaptive JSCC,
and HARQ mechanism to enable SemCom for wireless image
transmission. Therefore, we design an end-to-end training
objective for the SCB-HARQ system by maximizing the
mutual information between the source image x and its reconstruction x̂ = Gs (Zq , Ẑ, φs ). By the data processing inequality
[39], our objective is formulated as:
max I(x; x̂) = max I(x; Gs (Zq , Ẑ; φs ))
φs

φs

≤ max
φs

I(x; Zq , Ẑ)

(22)
(23)

Directly optimizing I(x; Zq , Ẑ) is intractable due to the
involvement of the generally unknown and computationally
challenging true distributions p(Zq , Ẑ | x) and p(Zq , Ẑ).
Therefore, we derive a variational lower bound for approximation.
Following the variational inference principle, we approximate the true posterior p(x | Zq , Ẑ) with a parameterized
decoder distribution qφs (x | Zq , Ẑ), implemented via a neural
network. Minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between the true and approximate posteriors yields a tractable
lower bound for the mutual information objective. This bound
is formally presented in Theorem 2.
Theorem 2: Assuming the variational decoder distribution
qφs (x | zq , ẑ) is an isotropic Gaussian:
qφs (x | Zq , Ẑ) = N (x; Gs (Zq , Ẑ; φs ), σ 2 I),

(24)

a variational lower bound of the mutual information objective
in Eq. (23) is given by:
h
i
1
I(x; Zq , Ẑ) ≥ − 2 Ep(x,Zq ,Ẑ) kx − Gs (Zq , Ẑ; φs )k2
2σ

Algorithm 3 Training of the SCB-HARQ System
Input: A batch of x, semantic codebook, masked rate-adaptive
JSCC, Fs (x, θs ).
Output: x̂, the enhanced semantic decoder Gs (·, φs ).
1: Z ← Fs (x, θs ).
2: Y ← Fc (Z, θc ).
3: V ← map(Z, Z).
4: Transmit Y and V through the channel.
5: Zq ← map(V, Z).
6: Ẑ ← Gc (Ŷ , φc ).
7: Calculate the semantic similarity S (i,j) by Eq. 7.
8: while S (i,j) < ξt and r <= rmax do
9:
Feedback fr ,
10:
Adjust coding rate by r,
11:
r + 1.
12: end while
13: x̂ ← Gs (Zq , Ẑ, φs ).
14: Update the parameter φs by Eq. 27.
d
log(2πσ 2 )
(25)
2
where d is the dimensionality of x, H(x) is the entropy of the
source. Consequently, maximizing this lower bound is equivalent to minimizing the expected MSE of the reconstruction
x̂. The proof of Theorem 2 is provided in Appendix B.
To further constrain the redundancy introduced by retransmissions and encourage spatially selective refinement, we
introduce a bandwidth-aware regularization term:


rX
M X
M
max
X
1
 kYr k0 + λg
Rretx =
σ (ξth − S(i, j))
rmax r=1 CM 2
M 2 i=1 j=1
+ H(x) −

(26)
Here, Yr denotes the transmitted feature tensor during the rth retransmission, and kYr k0 counts the number of non-zero
elements, thereby measuring the sparsity of the transmission.
The term is normalized by the bandwidth CM 2 . The second
term applies a sigmoid gating function σ(·) to the difference
between the semantic similarity score S(i, j) and a predefined
threshold ξth , scaled by a coefficient λg . This encourages
the model to suppress retransmissions for features that are
already semantically consistent with the codebook, thereby
reducing unnecessary retransmission overhead. Finally, this
penalty is averaged over the maximum number of retransmissions rmax to ensure scale invariance across different system
configurations.
By combining the information-theoretic surrogate and the
retransmission regularizer, the full training loss is given as:
LPhase 3 = E[kx − x̂k2 ] + Rretx

(27)

This objective provides a principled and fully differentiable
framework for training the SCB-HARQ decoder with both
semantic fidelity and bandwidth efficiency.
VI. S IMULATION S ETUP
In this section, simulations are performed to evaluate the
proposed system. The details of the simulation settings are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIANG et al.: SEMANTIC CODEBOOK-BASED HARQ FOR WIRELESS IMAGE TRANSMISSION

14341

introduced. Then, the proposed SCB-HARQ is compared with
other baselines.
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset: Our experiments adopt widely used highquality DIV2K image dataset for training, which provides
a comprehensive set of 800 training samples. We test the
performance of our method on the Kodak image dataset, comprising 24 high-resolution images that are specifically designed
to rigorously evaluate image reconstruction techniques. During training, images are randomly cropped into patches of
256 × 256 pixels.
2) The Proposed SCB-HARQ Will Be Compared With the
Following Methods: (1) a CNN-based deep joint sourcechannel coding (DJSCC) scheme, which is commonly
regarded as a benchmark of SemCom without HARQ. We
compare this method with the proposed method to evaluate
the performance gain achieved by the semantic codebook and
HARQ. (2) an ablation experiment of the SCB-HARQ method
only involving the semantic codebook without the HARQ
mechanism, denoted by SCB, to examine the impact of the
HARQ on retransmission efficiency and performance. (3) the
traditional incremental redundancy HARQ (II-HARQ) method
[40], employs JPEG for source encoding, 1/2 rate LDPC for
channel coding, and 4 QAM for modulation. The CRC is
then used to detect errors in the received data. When CRC
check fails, indicating the presence of transmission errors, the
system requests the transmission of incremental redundancy
information. This iterative process continues until successful
reception is confirmed or the predefined maximum number of
transmissions is reached.
The peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), multi-scale structural similarity (MS-SSIM), and learned perceptual image
patch similarity (LPIPS), are used to evaluate the performance
of image reconstruction under different SNR conditions.
Higher PSNR indicates better reconstruction quality in terms
of pixel-level. MS-SSIM assesses structural consistency across
multiple scales, with higher scores reflecting greater preservation of visual structures between the reconstructed and source
images. Additionally, LPIPS provides a measure of perceptual
similarity, where lower values indicate that the reconstructed
image is more perceptually similarity to the source.
3) Training Details: We employ the CNN as the backbone
for both the encoder and decoder. We adopt the Adam optimizer, setting its learning rate to 1 × 10−4 . For the DIV2K
dataset, we configure the batch size to 16. By adjusting the
output feature channel C, the compression ratio is defined as
k/n = [0.042, 0.084, 0.167, 0.250], and the maximum number
of retransmissions is set to 3. The implementation is conducted
using the PyTorch framework, and training is executed on a
GeForce RTX 4090 GPU.
B. Simulation Analysis
1) Size of Semantic Codebook: To determine an appropriate
size of the basic feature set N1 , we conducted a series of
exploratory experiments. The length of the vectors in the basic
feature set is fixed at 512, while the size of N1 varies among

Fig. 5. Impact of basic feature set size on image reconstruction performance
in VQGAN.

Fig. 6. Impact of base feature set size on PSNR performance in the SCBHARQ.

{256, 512, 1024, 2048}. As illustrated in Fig. 6, increasing the
size of the basic feature set generally improves reconstruction
performance. Specifically, the PSNR increases as the size of
the basic feature set grows from 256 to 2048. This trend
indicates that a larger feature set captures more detailed and
rich semantic information, which enhances the reconstruction
quality of the source images. However, it is noteworthy that
the rate of improvement in PSNR almost diminishes as N1
increases beyond 1024, suggesting that additional features
offer little performance gain but significantly increase computational cost. This finding is further supported by the LPIPS,
which shows a reduced rate of decrease as N1 grows beyond
1024, indicating that larger feature sets also diminish gains in
terms of perceptual quality.
The index-map I is generated based on the features in Z, as
previously described. The size of the basic feature set N1 plays
a critical role in determining the diversity of the index-maps.
An increase in N1 yields a richer set of base features, leading
to a more diverse collection of index-maps. Thus, clustering
more diverse index-maps result in a larger I, which effectively
minimizes quantization distortion. It indicates that the size

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14342

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 7. Impact of semantic similarity threshold on PSNR/MS-SSIM under various SNR levels.

of the index-map set N2 is intrinsically determined by N1 ,
and the choice of N1 must strike a balance between semantic
fidelity and computational cost.
Fig. 5 focuses on the effect of different sizes of the basic
feature set on the quality of reconstructed images in the
VQGAN framework without involving JSCC module and
transmission process. To further evaluate the impact of basic
feature set size on SCB-HARQ, we conduct a comparative
analysis of PSNR performance using the Kodak dataset for
different sizes of basic feature set. Fig. 6 illustrates that as
the size of basic feature set increases from 512 to 2048, there
is a significant improvement in PSNR across various SNR
conditions. However, it is noteworthy that the performance
promotion is marginal once the number of basic features in the
set exceeds a certain point. Based on empirical observations,
the size of the basic feature set is chosen as 1024, as it offers
an optimal trade-off between performance and computational
cost. Consequently, the experiments were conducted using
a feature set of size 1024 × 512, where the set contains
1024 features, each with a length of 512.
2) The Threshold of Semantic Similarity: We investigated
the optimal semantic similarity threshold for SCB-HARQ,
evaluating thresholds from 0.0 to 0.9 under various SNR
conditions in Fig. 7. A threshold within [0.6, 0.8] improves
performance, but gains diminish beyond this range. This is
primarily due to the constraint of limiting the maximum
number of retransmissions to 3, which is designed to balance
resource utilization and transmission performance. Based on
the trends, a threshold of ξt = 0.75 is recommended as it
improves transmission quality with reasonable overhead.
3) Comparison Between WSFI-Based and Direct IndexMap Transmission: In the SCB-HARQ system, the index
V plays a critical role in enabling the receiver to detect
semantic distortions by evaluating the similarity between
the received feature vectors and their corresponding
quantized representations from the semantic codebook.
The resulting similarity scores are then used to selectively
trigger retransmissions of semantically corrupted features.
Therefore, a central question arises: How effective is
semantic error detection when relying solely on the
compact index V ? To answer this, we conducted a

Fig. 8. Impact of basic feature set size on image reconstruction performance
in VQGAN.

comparative study between two representative approaches,
WSFI-512 and direct transmission of VQGAN-1024
index-map.
• WSFI-512 (two-stage): The index-maps are offline clustered into N2 = 512 representative patterns. During
inference, only the nearest cluster index V ∈ {1, . . . , N2 }
is transmitted, requiring only log2 N2 = 9 bits per image.
• VQGAN-1024 (single-stage): The full index-map generated by a VQGAN model with base feature set
size N1 = 1024 is transmitted directly. Given
M = 48, this results in a transmission cost of
M 2 × log2 N1 = 2304 × 10 = 23,040 bits per image.
As shown in Fig. 8, VQGAN-1024 avoids clusteringinduced quantization errors and achieves slightly higher
PSNR. However, it incurs significant transmission overhead,
exceeding 23,000 bits per image, which makes it impractical in bandwidth-constrained systems. In contrast, WSFI-512
reduces the index overhead to just 9 bits, achieving over
99.96 percent compression. Although this compact representation causes a minor PSNR drop of about 2 dB under
poor channel conditions, it retains sufficient semantic fidelity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIANG et al.: SEMANTIC CODEBOOK-BASED HARQ FOR WIRELESS IMAGE TRANSMISSION

14343

Fig. 9. Performance of the Kodak dataset over the AWGN and Rayleigh channels.

Fig. 10. Examples of visual comparison of Kodak dataset under AWGN channel at SNR = 10 dB.

for accurate error detection and effective retransmission.
WSFI-512 thus offers a compelling trade-off between communication efficiency and reconstruction quality.
4) Performance of SCB-HARQ in Terms of SNRs: Fig. 9
presents the PSNR and MS-SSIM performance on the Kodak
dataset over both AWGN channel and Rayleigh fading channels. First, Fig. 9(a) and 9(b) depict the relationship between
PSNR and SNR, and the relationship between MS-SSIM and
SNR under AWGN channel conditions, respectively. The proposed SCB-HARQ consistently outperforms baseline methods,
including DJSCC, traditional II-HARQ, and the SCB method.
Especially in the low SNR regime, SCB-HARQ achieves
significant gains in both PSNR and MS-SSIM. Specifically,
SCB improves the performance in PSNR at SNR = 1 dB by
36.6%, 20.9%, compared with traditional II-HARQ, DJSCC,
respectively. On this basis, SCB-HARQ further improves
communication performance by integrating the retransmission
mechanism, which retransmits the distorted features iteratively
based on feedback. As a result, SCB-HARQ achieves a PSNR
improvement of 46.62%, 29.45%, and 7.07%, compared with

traditional II-HARQ, DJSCC, and SCB, respectively. Similar trends are observed for MS-SSIM, where SCB-HARQ
achieves improvements of 34.72%, 13.47%, and 6.79%. These
results highlight the important role of the semantic codebook
and HARQ mechanism on transmission reliability in low SNR
conditions.
Next, Fig. 9(c) and 9(d) illustrate the PSNR and MS-SSIM
performance on the Kodak dataset over a Rayleigh fading
channel. The results demonstrate that the SCB-HARQ outperforms the basic methods (i.e., DJSCC, traditional II-HARQ,
and SCB) under all SNRs for PSNR and MS-SSIM. The
MS-SSIM and PSNR of SCB-HARQ increase progressively
with the growing SNR, and then gradually stabilize at high
SNRs. It indicates less or even no need for retransmissions in
the high SNR conditions. Notably, the PSNR of the SCBHARQ is nearly double that of the traditional II-HARQ,
further validating its effectiveness in SemCom. This significant
improvement can be attributed to two key factors: (1) the
semantic codebook, which accurately identifies distorted features. (2) the HARQ mechanism, which enhances robustness

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14344

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

TABLE I
T HE T OTAL DATA VOLUME IN B ITS C OMPARISON B ETWEEN SCB-HARQ
AND T RADITIONAL II-HARQ FOR O NE I MAGE D URING C HANNEL
T RANSMISSION U NDER THE SNR=10 D B

a 51.27% reduction in total data volume. In future work, we
will explore advanced CSI-aware semantic coding strategies,
and investigate simplified encoder-decoder architectures to
further reduce system complexity while maintaining semantic
robustness.
A PPENDIX A
P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

against channel noise through targeted retransmissions. Additionally, in comparison to AWGN channels, Rayleigh channels
present greater challenges due to their dynamic and unpredictable characteristics. Nevertheless, SCB-HARQ demonstrates superior performance gains under Rayleigh channel
conditions, particularly at low SNR. It highlights the effectiveness of the rate-adaptive JSCC scheme, which dynamically
adjusts to varying channel conditions, thereby enhancing the
transmission reliability of SCB-HARQ.
The reconstructed images of different transmission schemes
under AWGN conditions in the case of SNR = 10 dB,
as well as the randomly selected original image of the
Kodak dataset, are shown in Fig. 10. In the reconstructed
images, the corresponding PSNR and MS-SSIM are provided
below each image for quantitative comparison. It can be
observed that the reconstructed image (c) from the proposed
SCB-HARQ is almost indistinguishable from the original
image (b). Specifically, the reconstructed image (c) demonstrates superior visual quality, effectively addressing the issues
of blurred details, indistinct edges, and color distortions
observed in the image (d) and image (e) reconstructed by
traditional II-HARQ and DJSCC, respectively. Additionally,
compared to the image (f) generated by the standard SCB
method, image (c) preserves richer texture details. This
improvement can be attributed to the retransmission of distorted features, which enhances the representation of finer
image structures, resulting in a more accurate and detailed
reconstruction.
Moreover, Table I compares the number of bits for
one image transmission using SCB-HARQ and traditional
II-HARQ schemes. This result shows a 51.27% reduction in
total data volume when employing the SCB-HARQ, highlighting the benefits of SCB-HARQ on data reduction and
transmission reliability.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a semantic codebook-based
HARQ for SemCom (SCB-HARQ), designed for a reliable
and efficient wireless image transmission. Specifically, the
SCB-HARQ utilizes the semantic codebook to detect the
semantic errors for each received semantic feature based on a
predefined similarity threshold. This approach overcomes the
limitations of traditional bit-level error detection in SemCom
and addresses the high computational complexity associated
with existing semantic error detection methods. On this basis,
the system triggers adaptive rate coding to optimize the utilization of channel resources during retransmission. Compared to
traditional II-HARQ, the proposed SCB-HARQ demonstrates
a 46.29% improvement in transmission performance and

The mutual information between the latent feature Zf and
the prediction Ŷ can be decomposed as:
I(Zf ; Ŷ ) = H(Zf ) − H(Zf | Ŷ )

(28)

h
i
= H(Zf ) + Ep(Ŷ ), p(Zf |Ŷ ) log p(Zf | Ŷ )

(29)

≥ H(Zf ) + Eq [log q(Zf )]
h h
ii
− Ep(Ŷ ) Eq log p(Zf | Ŷ )


= H(Zf ) − KL q(Zf ) k p(Zf | Ŷ )

(30)
(31)

When the Gaussian assumptions in Eq. 19 and Eq. 20 hold,
the KL divergence can be computed in closed form:


2
1
d
2
(32)
I(Zf ; Ŷ ) = log(2πeσ ) − 2 E Ẑf − Zf
2
2σ


2
d
1
= − 2 E Zf − Ẑf
+ log(2πeσ 2 ) (33)
2σ
2
Therefore, the mutual information is lower-bounded by:


2
1
I(Zf ; Ŷ ) ≥ − 2 E Zf − Ẑf
+a
(34)
2σ
where a = d2 log(2πeσ 2 ) is a constant independent of model
parameters.
A PPENDIX B
P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
We derive a variational lower bound on the mutual
information I(x; Zq , Ẑ) as follows:
"
#
p(x, Zq , Ẑ)
I(x; Zq , Ẑ) = Ep(x,Zq ,Ẑ) log
(35)
p(x)p(Zq , Ẑ)
"
#
p(x | Zq , Ẑ)
= Ep(x,Zq ,Ẑ) log
(36)
p(x)
h
i
= Ep(x,Zq ,Ẑ) log p(x | Zq , Ẑ) + H(x)
(37)
h
i
≥ Ep(x,Zq ,Ẑ) log qφs (x | Zq , Ẑ) + H(x) (38)
h
i
1
= − 2 Ep(x,Zq ,Ẑ) kx − Gs (Zq , Ẑ; φs )k2
2σ
(39)
d
− log(2πσ 2 ) + H(x)
(40)
2
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst.
Tech. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, Jul. 1948.
Z. Lu et al., “Semantics-empowered communications: A tutorial-cumsurvey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 41–79, 1st
Quart., 2024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIANG et al.: SEMANTIC CODEBOOK-BASED HARQ FOR WIRELESS IMAGE TRANSMISSION

[3]

K. Niu et al., “A paradigm shift toward semantic communications,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 113–119, Nov. 2022.
[4] D. Gündüz et al., “Beyond transmitting bits: Context, semantics, and
task-oriented communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41,
no. 1, pp. 5–41, Jan. 2023.
[5] N. Farsad, M. Rao, and A. Goldsmith, “Deep learning for joint sourcechannel coding of text,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal
Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2018, pp. 2326–2330.
[6] Z. Weng and Z. Qin, “Semantic communication systems for
speech transmission,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 8,
pp. 2434–2444, Aug. 2021.
[7] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. Burth Kurka, and D. Gündüz, “Deep joint sourcechannel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Trans. Cognit.
Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–579, Sep. 2019.
[8] K. Yang, S. Wang, J. Dai, K. Tan, K. Niu, and P. Zhang, “WITT: A
wireless image transmission transformer for semantic communications,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Jun. 2023,
pp. 1–5.
[9] D. B. Kurka and D. Gunduz, “DeepJSCC-f: Deep joint source-channel
coding of images with feedback,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 178–193, May 2020.
[10] H. Wu, Y. Shao, E. Ozfatura, K. Mikolajczyk, and D. Gündüz,
“Transformer-aided wireless image transmission with channel
feedback,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 9,
pp. 11904–11919, Sep. 2024.
[11] D. Huang, X. Tao, F. Gao, and J. Lu, “Deep learning-based image
semantic coding for semantic communications,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[12] H. Zhang, S. Shao, M. Tao, X. Bi, and K. B. Letaief, “Deep learningenabled semantic communication systems with task-unaware transmitter
and dynamic data,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 1,
pp. 170–185, Jan. 2023.
[13] J. Dai et al., “Nonlinear transform source-channel coding for semantic communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 8,
pp. 2300–2316, Aug. 2022.
[14] P. Jiang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Wireless semantic communications for video conferencing,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41,
no. 1, pp. 230–244, Jan. 2023.
[15] M. Ding, J. Li, M. Ma, and X. Fan, “SNR-adaptive deep joint
source-channel coding for wireless image transmission,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2021,
pp. 1555–1559.
[16] H. Wu, Y. Shao, K. Mikolajczyk, and D. Gündüz, “Channel-adaptive
wireless image transmission with OFDM,” IEEE Wireless Commun.
Lett., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 2400–2404, Nov. 2022.
[17] M. Yang and H.-S. Kim, “Deep joint source-channel coding for wireless
image transmission with adaptive rate control,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2022, pp. 5193–5197.
[18] M. Yang, C. Bian, and H.-S. Kim, “Deep joint source channel coding
for wireless image transmission with OFDM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun., Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[19] A. Ahmed, A. Al-Dweik, Y. Iraqi, H. Mukhtar, M. Naeem, and
E. Hossain, “Hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) in wireless
communications systems and standards: A contemporary survey,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2711–2752, 2021.
[20] P. Jiang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and G. Y. Li, “Deep source-channel coding
for sentence semantic transmission with HARQ,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 5225–5240, Aug. 2022.
[21] F. Ni, R. Li, Z. Zhao, and H. Zhang, “Topology data analysis-based error
detection for semantic image transmission with incremental knowledgebased HARQ,” 2024, arXiv:2403.11542.
[22] Q. Zhou, R. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Xiao, and H. Zhang, “Adaptive bit rate
control in semantic communication with incremental knowledge-based
HARQ,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 3, pp. 1076–1089, 2022.
[23] J. Hu, F. Wang, W. Xu, H. Gao, and P. Zhang, “SemHARQ:
Semantic-aware HARQ for multi-task semantic communications,” 2024,
arXiv:2404.08490.
[24] Y. Sheng, L. Liang, H. Ye, S. Jin, and G. Ye Li, “Semantic communication for cooperative perception using HARQ,” 2024, arXiv:2409.09042.
[25] Q. Hu, G. Zhang, Z. Qin, Y. Cai, G. Yu, and G. Y. Li, “Robust semantic
communications with masked VQ-VAE enabled codebook,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 8707–8722, Dec. 2023.
[26] Y. Zhou et al., “MOC-RVQ: Multilevel codebook-assisted digital generative semantic communication,” 2024, arXiv:2401.01272.

14345

[27] P. Ye, Y. Sun, S. Yao, H. Chen, X. Xu, and S. Cui, “Codebookenabled generative end-to-end semantic communication powered by
transformer,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, May
2024, pp. 1–6.
[28] H. Zhang, M. Tao, Y. Sun, and K. B. Letaief, “Improving learning-based
semantic coding efficiency for image transmission via shared semanticaware codebook,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 1217–1232,
Feb. 2025.
[29] M. Yang, C. Bian, and H.-S. Kim, “OFDM-guided deep joint source
channel coding for wireless multipath fading channels,” IEEE Trans.
Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 584–599, Jun. 2022.
[30] D. B. Kurka and D. Gündüz, “Successive refinement of images with
deep joint source-channel coding,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Workshop
Signal Process. Adv. Wireless Commun. (SPAWC), Jul. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[31] J. Xu, B. Ai, W. Chen, A. Yang, P. Sun, and M. Rodrigues, “Wireless
image transmission using deep source channel coding with attention
modules,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 4,
pp. 2315–2328, Apr. 2022.
[32] P. Yi, Y. Cao, X. Kang, and Y.-C. Liang, “Semantic communication
systems with a shared knowledge base,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. Workshops, May 2023, pp. 1374–1379.
[33] H. Zhang, M. Tao, and S. Shao, “A Wyner–Ziv coding-based semantic
communication approach with a shared semantic codebook,” in Proc.
IEEE Globecom Workshops, Dec. 2023, pp. 1261–1266.
[34] C. Chen et al., “Real-world blind super-resolution via feature matching
with implicit high-resolution priors,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 1329–1338.
[35] P. Esser, R. Rombach, and B. Ommer, “Taming transformers for highresolution image synthesis,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 12873–12883.
[36] K. Liu, Y. Jiang, I. Choi, and J. Gu, “Learning image-adaptive codebooks
for class-agnostic image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 5350–5360.
[37] A. V. D. Oord, O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Neural discrete
representation learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30,
2017, pp. 1–10.
[38] Y. Bengio, N. Léonard, and A. Courville, “Estimating or propagating
gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation,” 2013,
arXiv:1308.3432.
[39] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, 2nd
ed., Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2006.
[40] S. B. Wicker, Error Control Systems for Digital Communication and
Storage, vol. 1. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1995.

Gaohong Liang received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from Chongqing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China,
in 2023. She is currently a Postgraduate Student with
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China. Her research interests
include HARQ, machine learning, and semantic
communications.

Xuefei Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunications engineering from Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China,
in 2010 and 2015, respectively. From 2013 to
2014, she was visiting the School of Electrical and
Information Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. She is currently an
Associate Professor with the School of Information and Communication Engineering, BUPT. Her
research interests include semantic communication
and satellite-terrestrial integrated networks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14346

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 73, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2025

Ji Zhang received the B.S. degree in computer
communication from the University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China in 1997, and
the master’s degree in business administration from
Sichuan University, China, in 2008. He is currently
the Chief Expert of Sichuan Cloud Network Integration Engineering Research Center, a Senior Member
of China Communications Society, and a Governmental Project Review Expert and the Professorate
Senior Engineer of China Telecom. He is currently
leading several major research projects and committed to the research of key technologies in the 5G+ industrial internet field. He
has won multiple China 5G Blooming Cup awards and the title of National
Best 5G Practitioner.

Yao Sun (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently a
Lecturer with the James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, U.K.
He has extensive research experience in wireless communication area. His research interests
include intelligent wireless networking, semantic
communications, blockchain systems, and resource
management in next generation mobile networks. He
has won the IEEE Communication Society of TAOS
Best Paper Award in 2019 ICC. He has served as the
TPC Chair for UCET 2021; and the TPC Member
for several international flagship conferences, including ICC 2022, VTC spring
2022, GLOBECOM 2020, WCNC 2019, and ICCT 2019. He has been the
guest editor of special issues of several international journals.

Qimei Cui (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering
from Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 2000
and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in
information and communications engineering from
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2006. Since 2014, she
has been a Full Professor with the School of Information and Communication Engineering, BUPT. In
2016, she was a Visiting Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, University of Notre
Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA. Her research interests include B5G/6G wireless
communications, mobile computing, and the IoT. She was a recipient of the
Best Paper Award from IEEE ISCIT 2012, IEEE WCNC 2014, and WCSP
2019; the Honorable Mention Demo Award from ACM MobiCom 2009;
and the Young Scientist Award from URSI GASS 2014. She serves as a
Technical Program Committee Member for several international conferences,
such as IEEE ICC, IEEE WCNC, IEEE PIMRC, IEEE ICCC, WCSP 2013,
and IEEE ISCIT 2012. She serves as the Technical Program Chair for APCC
2018, the Track Chair for IEEE/CIC ICCC 2018, and the Workshop Chair
for WPMC 2016. She serves as an Editor for Science China Information
Science, a Guest Editor for EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications
and Networking, International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, and
Journal of Computer Networks and Communications.

Xiaofeng Tao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1993, and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunication engineering from Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China,
in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He is currently
a Professor with BUPT. He has authored or coauthored over 200 papers and three books in wireless
communication areas. His research interests include
5G/B5G networks. He is a fellow of the Institution of
Engineering and Technology and the Chair of IEEE ComSoc Beijing Chapter.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Peng Cheng Laboratory. Downloaded on June 29,2026 at 01:34:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

